
PAGE 1
51st International Conference on Environmental Systems ICES-2022-87 
10-14 July 2022, St. Paul, Minnesota 
Copyright © 2022 German Aerospace Center (DLR) 
Energy and Power Demand of Food Production in Space 
based on Results of the EDEN ISS Antarctic Greenhouse 
Paul Zabel1, Vincent Vrakking2, Conrad Zeidler2, Daniel Schubert3 
German Aerospace Center (DLR), Institute of Space Systems, Bremen, Germany. 
The EDEN ISS greenhouse is a space-analogue test facility near the German Neumayer III 
station in Antarctica. The facility is part of the project of the same name and was designed 
and bui lt since 2015 and eventually deployed in Antarctica in January 2018. The first 
operational phase of the greenhouse started on February the 7th and continued until the 20th 
of November 2018. The purpose of the facility is to enable multidisciplinary research on topics 
related to future plant cultivation on human space exploration missions. Research on food 
quality and safety, plant health monitoring, microbiology, system validation, human factors, 
horticultural sciences and resource demand were conducted. Pa rt of the latter were 
measurements of the electrical energy and power demand. Those measurements were 
conducted on the facility and subsystem level, which were complemented by determining the 
demand of single components like LED lamps at different illumina tion settings. This paper 
describes the electrical energy and power demand during the experiment season between 
February and November 2018. Furthermore, the impact of these results on designing and 
planning future plant cultivation system in space are evaluated. 
Nomenclature 
AMS = Atmosphere Management Subsystem 
AWI = Alfred-Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research 
CDHS = Control and Data Handling Subsystem 
CPO = Cold Porch 
EMS = Energy Measurement System 
FEG = Future Explroation Greenhouse 
ILS = Illumination Subsystem 
MTF = Mobile Test Facility 
NDS = Nutrient Delivery Subsystem 
NM III = Neumayer Station III 
PDS = Power Distribution Subsystem 
SES = Service Section 
TCS = Thermal Control Subsystem 
I. Introduction 
HE implementation of space greenhouse systems into future habitats and their utilization in conjunction with 
other life support systems poses a number of challenges. One of these challenges is the electrical energy required 
to cultivate plants in a closed controlled environment. Maintaining su ch an environment is only possible with the 
extensive use of technologies  for e.g.  regulating the composition, temperature and humidity of the atmosphere; 
sustaining the nutrient and water supply; supplying illumination and monitoring plant health. All of these technologies 
require electrical energy to be operated. Information about the electrical energy demand of space greenhouses is 
scarce, due to the lack of any large scale systems operational in space. Only small experimental plant cultivation 
systems have been deployed during space missions1 so far. Data regarding power and energy demand of these systems 
                                                           
1 Head of Synergetic Material Utilization young investigator group, Institute of Space Systems, Robert -Hooke-Str. 7, 
28359 Bremen, Germany. 
2 Research Associate, Institute of Space Systems, Robert-Hooke-Str. 7, 28359 Bremen, Germany. 
3 Head of EDEN research group, Institute of Space Systems, Robert-Hooke-Str. 7, 28359 Bremen, Germany. 
T 

PAGE 2
 
2 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
is almost never published  and it can be doubted that this data can be used to estimate the energy demand of a large 
scale food production system providing the majority of the food to a future space crew.  
Analogue experiments with plant cultivation facilities in a relevant environment on Earth can fill this gap. Suitable 
locations for such experiments are Antarctic research bases, which face similar difficulties like future space habitats. 
In fact, several of these research bases deployed plant cultivation facilities over the last d ecades2. Although, many of 
these greenhouse systems have not been designed as space research and innovation experiments, but as food 
supplement facilities. The South Pole Food Growth Chamber and  the EDEN ISS Mobile Test Facility are two 
Antarctic greenhouses which were designed, built and operated with a focus on testing plant cultivation in a remote 
environment as a precursor for future space missions. Both facilities were used for a large numbe r of different 
experiments, which also included measurements regarding the electrical energy demand.  
This paper focuses on analyzing the energy measurement data generated during the 2018 experiment phase of the 
EDEN ISS project. A dedicated energy measurem ent system was installed in the greenhouse system from the 
beginning to monitor the electrical power and energy demand of the whole facility, its subsystems and a few 
components. This data allows a detailed view on the energy usage of a space greenhouse an alogue test facility  and 
helps to draw recommendations for future space systems. 
II. Materials and Methods 
A. EDEN ISS Mobile Test Facility Infrastructure 
The EDEN ISS Mobile Test Facility (MTF) is located in the immediate vicinity of the Neumayer Station III (NM 
III) which is operated by the German Alfred-Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research (AWI). The MTF was 
designed and built as an experimental facility for plant cultivation systems, allowing the test ing of essential 
technologies and production procedures for future long-duration human space missions3. Detailed system analysis was 
conducted by the consortium partners resulting in a solid design 4–6, including a complete risk assessment 7. The MTF 
consists of two customized 20 foot high-cube shipping containers, which are placed on top of a raised platform located 
approximately 400 meters south of NM III. The research facility can be subdivided into three distinct sections:  
• Airlock/ Cold Porch (CPO) (Blue section in Figure 1): A small room providing storage and a small air buffer 
to limit the entry of cold air when the main access door of the facility is used. This area is used for changing 
clothes. Furthermore, the main fresh water tank and the waste water tank are both located in the subfloor 
space of this section. 
• Service Section (SES) (Red section in Figure 1): This section houses the primary control, atmosphere 
management, thermal control, power  control and nutrient delivery systems of the MTF 8. Additionally, this 
section provides a working table including sink, trash bins, and storage for tools and consumables. In addition 
this section housed an independent rack-like plant cultivation system as part of the plant growth demonstrator 
for future deployment onboard the International Space Station (ISS)9,10.  
• Future Exploration Greenhouse (FEG) (Green section in Figure 1): The main plant cultivation space of the 
MTF which includes multi -level plant growth racks with a total growth area of 12.5 m 2 operating in a 
controlled environment. The FEG is used to study plant cultivation and the related technologies for future 
planetary habitats11.  
 
The technologies required to cultivate plants in a controlled environment are arranged in six different subsystems, 
which are briefly described in the following. Detailed information about the subsystems can be found in  other 
publications of the authors11,8. 
• The nutrient delivery subsystem  (NDS) adjusts the irrigation water’s pH and EC value. Depending on the 
plant type (leafy or fruit -building crop), the mixing computer provides a dedicated nutrient solution that is 
delivered directly t o the roots. Eight high -pressure pumps spray a fine nutrient mist inside the root 
compartment of each plant tray.  
• The atmosphere management subsystem (AMS) regulates the temperature, humidity, and CO2 concentration 
within the FEG. Furthermore, the air flo w is filtered (particle filter, HEPA, and activated carbon filter) and 
the humidity condensate water is recovered and fed back to the fresh water tank.  
• The thermal control subsystem (TCS) is used to remove excess heat from the MTF and to provide a cool ing 
fluid to the dehumidifier for condensation of the humidity produced by the plants. 
• The illumination control subsystem (ILS) consists of 42 fluid-cooled LED fixtures integrated into the FEG. 
The light spectrum can freely be composed of red, blue, far-red, and white for each plant tray.  

PAGE 3
 
3 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
• The power distribution subsystem  (PDS) provides electrical energy to all subsystems of the MTF. The 
electrical energy is generated in NM III and transmitted to the MTF. 
• The control and data handling subsystem  (CDHS) consists of a set of independent programmable logic 
controllers which receive information from a wide range of sensors. Based on this information and defined 
program logics this subsystem controls all functions of the MTF. The CDHS sends system telemetry to the 
mission control center in Bremen, Germany. Furthermore, every day a set of images taken from fixed 
positions inside the FEG is sent to the mission control center to allow remote experts to observe plant 
development and to assist the on-site operator12. 
 
 
Figure 1: Schematic top-view of the MTF. The blue section indicates the Cold Porch. The red area is 
called Service Section and houses a work desk and almost all greenhouse subsystems. The green section is the 
main plant cultivation space, called the Future Exploration Greenhouse. Red boxes indicate doors between 
the sections and to the outside. The light blue box indicates a window.  
B. Experiment timeframe 
The MTF arrived in Antarctica on the 3rd of January 2018. The deployment took around five weeks and was 
finished in early February 13. The winter -over on-site operator remained in Antarctica for the following 10 months 
until December 2018. In the following chapters ‘experi mental phase’ refers to the period from mid-February 2018 to 
mid-November 2018. The timeline of the experiment phase is shown in Figure 2. 
The first plants were sown on February 7th 2018. The winter-over period started with the departure of the last summer 
crew on February 18 th. The first harvest of lettuce and leafy greens was on March 20 th. The first cucumber harvest 
(29th of March) and first tomato harvest (16th of May) took place in the weeks that followed. The coldest temperature 
of the season was recorded in the morning of the 8 th of October 2018 with -43.5 °C. The winter -over period ended 
with the arrival of the first summer crew on November 2nd. The experiment campaign of the MTF ended with the final 
harvest which took place on November 20 th. The EDEN ISS winter -over operator departed a few days before 
Christmas 2018. 
 
Figure 2: Timeline of the EDEN ISS experiment phase (early 2018 to early 2019). 


PAGE 4
 
4 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
C. Energy Measurement System 
The hardware of the energy measurement system (EMS) utilizes the DIRIS Digiware energy measurement devices 
sold by the company Socomec. DIRIS Digiware is a modular system which allows a customized solution  for energy 
and power measurements. It is possible to combine a variety of electrical voltage and current measurement modules. 
Depending on the module type three to six sensors can be connected Different types of sensors are available depending 
on the cable diameter and the current flowing through the cable.  
The EDEN ISS EMS consists of a voltage measurement module (U -30) and two sorts of current measurement 
modules (I-35 and I-61). The U-30 module has three sensor inputs and measures the voltage of the th ree-phase main 
power supply to the MTF. Hereby, the voltage between each phase and neutral is measured. One current measurement 
module I -35 measures the electrical current of each of the three main power supply phases. Six I -61 current 
measurement modules,  each of which has six sensor slots, measure the electrical current on the subsystem and 
component level. The measurement module setup is shown in Figure 3. The actual sensors performing the 
measurement are located on the respective power line inside the PDS cabinet directly after the fuse securing the 
respective subsystem or component. All modules are connected to each other in a row via an integrated bus. In addition 
to the measurement modules, the EDEN ISS EMS also has a small display integrated in the power box to visualize 
data inside the MTF. A gateway module is used to connect the EMS to the network infrastructure of the MTF which 
allows access to the E MS from each computer connected to the EDEN ISS local network in Antarctica and also 
remotely from the mission control center in Bremen, Germany. 
 
 
Figure 3: The EMS as installed in the power distribution box of the MTF. Modules f rom left to right: One 
voltage measurement module U30, one current measurement module I -35, six current measurement modules 
I-61.  
The EDEN ISS EMS setup with the DIRIS Digiware hardware allows for precise measurements of voltage and 
current due to the hig h accuracy class of the modules and attached sensors, see Table 1. In addition to the measured 
voltage and current values the EMS can calculate power and energy demand internally and display those values. The 
EMS also allows export of the data via csv files, which makes it easy to analyze the data. Besides the mere 
measurement of voltage and current, the EMS is also capable of analyzing the status of the power distribution system 
of the MTF by measuring values such as frequency or inductive loads. 
 
Table 1: Sensor types and accuracy class for each measurement module. 
Module Sensor type Accuracy 
class 
U-30 (voltage) Directly wired Class 0.2 
I-35 (current) TE-35 Class 0.5 
I-61 (current) TE-18 Class 0.5 


PAGE 5
 
5 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
D. Electrical Power Generation 
As mentioned previously the MTF has no means to generate electrical power by its own, but it is connected to the 
power grid of NM III. The station has four combined heat and power plants (CHP) running with diesel, of which one 
is an emergency back -up and up to three are operational on demand. Each CHP provides up to 150 kW electrical 
power. The thermal load resulting from the power generation is used to heat the station living and working areas. The 
CHPs are supplemented with a wind turbine, which can generate up to 30 kW electrical power.  
III. Results 
A. System level – MTF overall energy and power demand 
The electrical energy demand of the MTF ranged from 6,600 to 7,800 kWh per month, see Figure 4, with February 
and November being the exception because only 21 respectively 20 days of those months account to the experiment 
phase. The total dema nd from February to November 2018 was around 68,516 kWh which corresponds to 5, 481 
kWh/m² cultivation area.  
The drop of the energy demand in June was caused by the failure of one of the two free cooler fans  on the roof of 
the MTF  mid of May. The fans have a large power demand. The remaining fan was shut down from June until 
September, because the low temperatures of the Antarctic environment were enough to cool the cooling fluid without 
the need for forced convection by the fans. The rise in energy demand from June to October is most likely associated 
with the dropping temperatures during the winter months and the corresponding need for additional electrical heating. 
Without the shut down of the freecooler fans, the energy demand i n the June -October period would be around 900 
kWh per month higher than shown in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4: Monthly electrical energy demand (in kWh) of the MTF in 2018. (*February data starting from the 
7th. **November data until the 20th) 
 
The overall power demand of the MTF from March to November 2018 is shown in  Figure 5. The February data 
could not be used, because of recording issues of the measurement system. The graph shows a cyclic behaviour, which 
is caused mainly by the daily cycle of the LED lamps.  During the photoperiod of 17 hours the LED lamps were o n, 
during the dark period of 7 hours the LEDs were off. The average power demand during the photoperiod is 11.23 kW 
and during the dark period 8.2 1 kW which corresponds to an average of, respectively, 898.4 W/m² and 656.8 W/m² 
cultivation area. 
 
4973
6597
7402 7636
6605
7229 7663 7675 7531
5205
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000Electrical Energy Demand [kWh]

PAGE 6
 
6 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Electrical power demand (in W) of the MTF from March 1 st until November 20th 2018. 
B. Subsystem level – Energy and power demand of each subsystem 
The energy demand of each subsystem is shown in Figure 6. The aforementioned effect of the shutdown of the 
free cooler fans is clearly visible in the values of the TCS. The values of the common equipment rise constantly from 
May to October. This behaviour is caused by the room heaters located in the three sections of the MTF. These heaters 
turn on, when the temperature drops below a certain threshold. The values of the common equipment consequently 
follow the dropping external temperatures during winter (A pril to October), because the heaters turn on more 
frequently. The energy demand of the AMS, ILS, NDS and CDHS  are relatively constant throughout the year. Please 
note, that the data for February and November is only available for 21 respectively 20 days.  
 
 
Figure 6: Monthly electrical energy demand (in kWh) of each MTF subsystem in 2018. (*February data 
starting from the 7th. **November data until the 20th) 
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
01.03.18 31.03.18 01.05.18 01.06.18 01.07.18 01.08.18 01.09.18 01.10.18 01.11.18
Electrical Power Demand [W]
Date
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000Electrical Energy Demand [kWh]
AMS TCS Common Equipment CDHS ILS NDS

PAGE 7
 
7 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
Table 2 shows the absolute and relative energy demand of each subsystem from March to November 2018. The 
AMS had the highest demand followed by the ILS, the common equipment and the TCS. The demand of the CDHS 
is relatively small and the demand of the NDS is almost negligible. 
 
Table 2: Absolute and relative electrical energy demand for each subsystem between February and 
November 2018. 
Subsystem AMS TCS Common 
Equipment CDHS  ILS NDS 
Absolute electrical energy 
demand [kWh] 23,040 7,551 13,461 4,268 19,033 1,163 
Relative electrical energy 
demand 33 % 11 % 20 % 6 % 28 % 2 % 
C. Variation in subsystem power demand throughout a typical day 
The power demand of some subsystems varies throughout the day, because those subsystems are subject to a 
specific schedule or react to certain parameters. The illumination subsystem is on a day -night cycle. All LEDs inside 
the FEG are turned on and off tog ether based on a specific schedule. At 00:00, the LEDs are switched from normal 
illumination to a dusk setting with reduced intensity and therefore reduced power demand. After an hour the LEDs 
are turned off completely for the dark period which is scheduled during the normal night rhythm of the crew. At 08:00, 
the lamps are switched on to a dawn setting with reduced intensity. At 09:00 the lamps are switched to the normal 
intensity level until 23:59. This day -night cycle can also be seen in the power demand  graph of the ILS in Figure 7 
and Figure 8, which show exemplary graphs for two days. 
The power demand of the AMS largely depends on the temperature inside the FEG which in turn depends on the 
external conditions and the amount of heat produced by the LED lamps. Some of the electrical energy used by the 
LEDs is converted to heat which warms the air inside the FEG. The FEG in turn loses heat to the Antarctic 
environment. The AMS has heating rods to warm the atmosphere of the FEG in case the temperature drops below a 
certain set point, which is necessary throughout the whole day and especially during the night period, when the LEDs 
are shut off. 
 
Figure 7: Subsystem power demand on September 5th 2018. 
 
The power demand of the TCS, CDHS and NDS are nearly constant throughout each day. Whereas the power 
demand of the common equipment shows some oscillations. Figure 7 shows daily graphs from September 5 th, which 
means in th e mid of the Antarctic winter and corresponding low external temperatures, and Figure 8 shows daily 
graphs from April 28th, a day with mild external temperatures. The main difference between the two days is the power 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5.9.18 0:00 5.9.18 4:00 5.9.18 8:00 5.9.18 12:00 5.9.18 16:00 5.9.18 20:00 6.9.18 0:00
Electrical Power Demand [W]
Time
TCS CDHS Common Equipment AMS ILS NDS

PAGE 8
 
8 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
demand of the common equipment, which is higher on September 5 th compared to April 28 th. This is caused by the 
electrical room heaters installed in the Cold Porch and Service Section which keep the air temperature stable. One can 
see the additional electrical power demand of around 1,500 W on September 5 th compared to April 28 th associated 
with those room heaters. 
 
 
Figure 8: Subsystem power demand on April 28th 2018. 
IV. Discussion 
A. Comparing the MTF energy demand to other Antarctic greenhouses 
While there are many other greenhouse facilities in Antarctica 2, data on their electrical energy demand is scarce. 
Only for the South Pole Food Growth Chamber (SPFGC) data is available 14. The SPFGC was operational around the 
year 2010 and located inside a building of the American Amundsen -Scott South Pole Station. Several plan t species 
were cultivated inside the SPFGC, which had a cultivation area of around 22.7 m². The SPFGC and the EDEN ISS 
MTF are hard to compare, because the SPFGC was a set of customized rooms inside a heated building whereas the 
MTF is a stand -alone facility. Furthermore, the SPFGC used high -pressure sodium lamps instead of LEDs for plant 
illumination. The electrical energy demand of the former is much higher compared to LEDs.  
The energy demand of the SPFGC was around 281 kWh/d which is in the same range as the EDEN ISS MTF (240 
kW/h). However, when considering the cultivation area, the SPFGC required 12.8 kWh/m²/d and the MTF required 
19.2 kWh/m²/d. The higher demand of electrical energy of the MTF compared to the SPFGC was most likely caused 
by the different environments in which the two facilities were located. Furthermore, it is not clear whether the SPFGC 
recovered the moisture transpired by the plants. Recovering moisture from the atmosphere is energy intensive and is 
also one factor  which might have caused EDEN ISS to have a higher energy demand. 
B. Considerations regarding the influence of the Antarctic environment  
The EDEN ISS MTF stands on a platform and is year-round exposed to the Antarctic environment. Consequently, 
equipment is required to counter act the heat loss to the environment and other equipment which is only required for 
this location. This equipment is not associated with plant growth in general. For example, a facility with a different 
purpose in the same location would also need electric al heaters to keep the internal air temperature in a comfortable 
zone. Most of the equipment not directly related to plant cultivation (e.g. room heaters, water boiler, room illumination 
or tea kettle) is encompassed in the category ‘Common Equipment’. Thi s category alone required 13,461 kWh of 
electrical energy (20% of total MTF demand) in the experiment season 2018 and had an average power demand of 
2,280 W. 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
28.4.18 0:00 28.4.18 4:00 28.4.18 8:00 28.4.18 12:00 28.4.18 16:00 28.4.18 20:00 29.4.18 0:00
Electrical Power Demand [W]
Time
TCS CDHS Common Equipment AMS ILS NDS

PAGE 9
 
9 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
Another influence of the Antarctic environment is on the energy demand of the atmosphere management subsystem 
and the thermal control subsystem, which maintain the temperature and humidity inside the greenhouse, among others. 
However, it cannot clearly determined how much of the energy demand of both subsystems is caused by the Atnarctic 
environment and which can be attributed to plant cultivation alone. Doing that would require to position the whole 
facility in a location with moderate climate conditions to have data for comparison.   
C. Energy demand for illumination 
Besides the atmosphere management subs ystem and the thermal control subsystem, the illumination subsystem 
also has a high electrical energy demand, e.g. 28% of the total energy demand of EDEN ISS in 2018. This demand 
depends on the lamp technology used, the lighting schedule, the spectrum and the intensity provided for plant 
cultivation and therefore varies with the day -night cycle and also with the maturity of the plants. Younger plants 
typically receive less light compared to fully mature plants. The illumination subsystem is independent of the Antarctic 
environment and therefore analogue experiment data allows a better projection for furute space greenhouses.  
When comparing again EDEN ISS  with the SPFGC, t he SPFGC required 9.5 kWh/m²/d and the EDEN  ISS 
required 5.7 kWh/m²/d for plant illumina tion. This large difference is mainly caused by the used technology. The 
SPFGC data is from an operational period during which high-pressure sodium lamps were used for plant illumination, 
whereas EDEN ISS uses LED lamps. When comparing the energy demand for plant illumination, it is clear that LED 
lamps are superior over high-pressure sodium lamps, which was expected. The EDEN ISS ILS required only 60% of 
the electrical energy the SPFGC used for providing light for the cultivation crops. This comparison was only made on 
the basis of energy demand and cultivation area. For a detailed comparison of the energy demand of the illumination 
systems additional information like the length of the photoperiod per day and the light intensity are required which 
were not available in that detail for the SPFGC. 
D. Electrical energy demand for food production 
The EDEN ISS MTF produced in total 517 kg of biomass during the 2018 season, of which 268 kg were food 15. 
The remaining biomass were roots, stems, inedible leaves. The production of this amount of biomass required around 
55,055 kWh, this value only includes the hardware required for plant cultivation and excludes the electrical energy 
demand of the common equipment. This means t hat ~205 kWh electrical energy per kilogram produced food was 
required in 2018. For comparison, the SPFGC used around 22.8 kWh/kg14. This is partly caused by the different energy 
requirements mentioned before and partly by the different biomass productivity. SPFGC was reported to have a 
productivity of 0.13 kg/m²/d 14 and EDEN ISS had a productivity of around 0.08 kg/m²/d in 2018 15. One should keep 
in mind, that both Antarctic facilities cultivated salad and vegetable crops and no legumes and no grains.  
V. Conclusion 
This paper pres ented the results of measuring the electrical energy and power demand of an experimental plant 
cultivation system for future bio -regenerative life support systems. Comparable systems are scarce making 
comparisons on the demand and efficiency nearly impossi ble. However, the data shown in this paper will be helpful 
for future investigations of such systems. 
The location of the EDEN ISS MTF, Antarctica, had several impacts on the measurements. Equipment that would 
not be installed in a space greenhouse (e.g. electrical room heaters) was necessary to counteract the low temperatures 
of the external environment. Although, most of this additional equipment was grouped in the Common Equipment 
subsystem and measured separately, the Antarctic environment also affected the energy demand of the TCS and AMS. 
The ILS measurement results were not affected by the Antarctic environment. These effects cannot be separated from 
the nominal measurements (operation in a norml environment), because this kind of reference measurements have not 
been conducted so far. However, the EDEN ISS MTF is going to be brought back from Antarctica in the next years 
and operated in a location in Germany, which will allow these measurements. The 2018 data and the data from 
subsequent could then be reevaluated and interpreted based on these reference measurements. 
Despite the influence of the Antarctic environment on the measurements, it is safe to say, that the highest demand 
of electrical energy is required for illumination and atmosphere, including thermal, management. Since the efficiency 
of LEDs is already very close to its theoretical limit, improvements will only have small effects on reducing the energy 
demand. However, reductions of the energy demand is possible by more effectively illuminati ng the crop canopy by 
reducing stray light and also by better determining the illumination demand of each crop to avoid over -illumination. 
The authors see more room for energy reductions in the atmosphere management subsystem. There it is important to 
find efficient ways to ventilate the growth area and simultaneously control the temperature and humidity. It should 

PAGE 10
 
10 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
also be investigated to make use of the spare heat that is produced by the subsystems of the plant cultivation system, 
which would improve its overall efficiency. Thus a holistic approach to the energy system of the whole spacecraft or 
habitat including a plant cultivation system could also bring improvements. 
Another conlusion that can be drawn indirectly from the experimental results presented in this paper, is the lack 
of available data regarding the energy demand of plant cultivation systems for bio-regenerative life support. Measuring 
electrical energy and power demand during the operation of such a system is only rarely conducted. However, it is of 
uttermost importance for designing future systems to understand these demands. Only then conlusions on the overall 
effectivity can be drawn. Consequently, the authors of this paper recommend to include energy measurements in every 
future experiment or technology demonstrator. The absolute minimum of measurements to be taken are on the demand 
of the overall system. The next step would be to perform measurements on subsystem level, which eventually should 
be complemented with measurements on component level, especially if specific components (e.g. new LED 
illumination systems) are tested. Measurements should be done in a frequency that matches the subsystem and plant 
cycles, e.g. a sum only over one day of operation is not enough, because it would ignore the daily variation caused by 
the plant illumination schedule. 
As expected, the demand of electrical energy of plant cultivation systems is high, but only with consistent and 
consequent measurements can components and operation techniques identified and tested for reducing this demand.  
Acknowledgments 
The EDEN ISS project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 
program under grant agreement No 636501. 
References 
1 P. Zabel, M. Bamsey, D. Schubert, M. Tajmar, Review and analysis of over 40 years of space plant growth systems, Life 
Sci. Space Res. (Amst) 10 (2016) 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lssr.2016.06.004. 
2 M. Bamsey, P. Zabel, C. Zeidler, D. Gyimesi, D. Schubert, E. Kohlberg, D. Mengedoht, J. Rae, Review of Antarctic 
greenhouses and plant production facilities: A historical account of food plants on the ice, 45th International Conference on 
Environmental Systems, Bellevue, Washington, 2015. 
3 P. Zabel, M. Bamsey, C. Zeidler, V. Vrakking, B.-W. Johannes, P. Rettberg, D. Schubert, O. Romberg, B. Imhof, R. 
Davenport, W. Hoheneder, R. Waclavicek, C. Gilbert, M. Hogle, A. Battistelli, W. Stefanoni, S. Moscatello, S. Proietti, G. Santi, 
F. Nazzaro, F. Fratianni, R. Coppola, M. Dixon, M. Stasiak, E. Kohlberg, D. Mengedoht, L. Bucchieri, E. Mazzoleni, V. Fetter, 
T. Hummel, G. Boscheri, F. Massobrio, M. Lamantea, C. Lobascio, A. Petrini, M. Adami, G. Bonzano, L. Fiore, T. Dueck, C. 
Stanghellini, G. Bochenek, A. Gilley, M. McKeon-Bennett, G. Stutte, T. Larkin, S. Moane, P. Murray, P. Downey, R. Fortezza, 
A. Ceriello, Introducing EDEN ISS - A European project on advancing plant cultivation technologies and operations, 45th 
International Conference on Environmental Systems, Bellevue, Washington, 2015. 
4 M. Bamsey, P. Zabel, C. Zeidler, L. Poulet, D. Schubert, E. Kohlberg, T. Graham, Design of a containerized greenhouse 
module for deployment to the Neumayer III Antarctic Station, 44th International Conference on Environmental Systems, 
Tucson, Arizona, 2014. 
5 M. Bamsey, P. Zabel, C. Zeidler, V. Vrakking, D. Schubert, E. Kohlberg, M. Stasiak, T. Graham, Early Trade-offs and 
Top-Level Design Drivers for Antarctic Greenhouses and Plant Production Facilities, 46th International Conference on 
Environmental Systems, Vienna, Austria, 2016. 
6 P. Zabel, M. Bamsey, C. Zeidler, V. Vrakking, D. Schubert, O. Romberg, G. Boscheri, T. Dueck, The preliminary design 
of the EDEN ISS Mobile Test Facility - An Antarctic greenhouse, 46th International Conference on Environmental Systems, 
Vienna, Austria, 2016. 
7 A. Santos, V. Infante, M. Bamsey, D. Schubert, A case study in the application of failure analysis techniques to Antarctic 
Systems: EDEN ISS, 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Systems Engineering (ISSE), Edinburgh, United Kingdom, IEEE, 
03.10.2016 - 05.10.2016, pp. 1–7. 
8 V. Vrakking, M. Bamsey, P. Zabel, C. Zeidler, D. Schubert, O. Romberg, Service Section Design of the EDEN ISS 
Project, 47th International Conference on Environmental Systems, Charleston, South Carolina, 2017. 
9 G. Boscheri, V. Guarnieri, C. Iacopini, I. Locantore, M. Lamantea, C. Lobascio, D. Schubert, The EDEN ISS Rack-Like 
Plant Growth Facility, 46th International Conference on Environmental Systems, Vienna, Austria, 2016. 
10 G. Boscheri, M. Volponi, M. Lamantea, C. Lobascio, D. Schubert, P. Zabel, Main performance results of the EDEN ISS 
rack-like plant growth facility, 47th International Conference on Environmental Systems, Charleston, South Carolina, 2017. 
11 P. Zabel, M. Bamsey, C. Zeidler, V. Vrakking, D. Schubert, O. Romberg, Future Exploration Greenhouse Design of the 
EDEN ISS project, 47th International Conference on Environmental Systems, Charleston, South Carolina, 2017. 
12 C. Zeidler, P. Zabel, V. Vrakking, M. Dorn, M. Bamsey, D. Schubert, A. Ceriello, R. Fortezza, D. de Simone, C. 
Stanghellini, F. Kempkes, E. Meinen, A. Mencarelli, G.-J. Swinkels, A.-L. Paul, R.J. Ferl, The Plant Health Monitoring System 

PAGE 11
 
11 
International Conference on Environmental Systems 
 
 
of the EDEN ISS Space Greenhouse in Antarctica During the 2018 Experiment Phase, Frontiers in Plant Science 10 (2019) 
1457. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.01457. 
13 D. Schubert, M. Bamsey, P. Zabel, C. Zeidler, V. Vrakking, Status of the EDEN ISS Greenhouse after on-site installation 
in Antarctica, 48th International Conference on Environmental Systems, Albuquerque, New Mexico, 2018. 
14 R.L. Patterson, G.A. Giacomelli, M. Kacira, P.D. Sadler, R.M. Wheeler, Description, operation and production of the 
South Pole Food Growth Chamber, Acta Hortic. (2012) 589–596. https://doi.org/10.17660/ActaHortic.2012.952.75. 
15 P. Zabel, C. Zeidler, V. Vrakking, M. Dorn, D. Schubert, Biomass Production of the EDEN ISS Space Greenhouse in 
Antarctica During the 2018 Experiment Phase, Frontiers in Plant Science 11 (2020) 656. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2020.00656. 
 