
PAGE 1
SANDIA REPORT
SAND2010-6735
Unlimited Release
Printed September, 2010
Computational and Experimental
Platform for Understanding and
Optimizing Water Flux and Salt
Rejection in Nanoporous Membranes
Susan B. Rempe, David M. Rogers, Ying-Bing Jiang, Shaorong Y ang, Kevin Le-
ung, C. Jeffrey Brinker, Chris Lorenz, Sameer Varma, Dubravko Sabo, Zhu Chen,
Seema Singh, Caroline S. Rempe, T om Mayer, T odd M. Alam, Peter J. Feibelman,
John Merson
Prepared by
Sandia National Laboratories
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87185 and Livermore, California 94550
Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-program laboratory managed and operated by Sandia Corporation,
a wholly owned subsidiary of Lockheed Martin Corporation, for the U.S. Department of Energy’s
National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-AC04-94AL85000.
Approved for public release; further dissemination unlimited.


PAGE 2
Issued by Sandia National Laboratories, operated for the United States Department of Energy
by Sandia Corporation.
NOTICE: This report was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United
States Government. Neither the United States Government, nor any agency thereof, nor any
of their employees, nor any of their contractors, subcontractors, or their employees, make any
warranty, express or implied, or assume any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy,
completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or rep-
resent that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any speciﬁc
commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise,
does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the
United States Government, any agency thereof, or any of their contractors or subcontractors.
The views and opinions expressed herein do not necessarily state or reﬂect those of the United
States Government, any agency thereof, or any of their contractors.
Printed in the United States of America. This report has been reproduced directly from the best
available copy.
Available to DOE and DOE contractors from
U.S. Department of Energy
Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc and Technical Information
P.O. Box 62
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
Telephone: (865) 576-8401
Facsimile: (865) 576-5728
E-Mail: reports@adonis.osti.gov
Online ordering: http://www.osti.gov/bridge
Available to the public from
U.S. Department of Commerce
National Technical Information Service
5285 Port Royal Rd
Springﬁeld, VA 22161
Telephone: (800) 553-6847
Facsimile: (703) 605-6900
E-Mail: orders@ntis.fedworld.gov
Online ordering: http://www.ntis.gov/help/ordermethods.asp?loc=7-4-0#online
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
• •UNITEDSTATES OF AMERICA
2

PAGE 3
SAND2010-6735
Unlimited Release
Printed September, 2010
Computational and Experimental Platform for
Understanding and Optimizing Water Flux and Salt
Rejection in Nanoporous Membranes
Susan B. Rempe
Abstract
Aﬀordable clean water is both a global and a national security issue as lack of it can cause
death, disease, and international tension. Furthermore, eﬃcient water ﬁltration reduces the
demand for energy, another national issue. The best current solution to clean water lies
in reverse osmosis (RO) membranes that remove salts from water with applied pressure,
but widely used polymeric membrane technology is energy intensive and produces water de-
pleted in useful electrolytes. Furthermore incremental improvements, based on engineering
solutions rather than new materials, have yielded only modest gains in performance over
the last 25 years. We have pursued a creative and innovative new approach to membrane
design and development for cheap desalination membranes by approaching the problem at
the molecular level of pore design. Our inspiration comes from natural biological channels,
which permit faster water transport than current reverse osmosis membranes and selectively
pass healthy ions. Aiming for an order-of-magnitude improvement over mature polymer
technology carries signiﬁcant inherent risks. The success of our fundamental research eﬀort
lies in our exploiting, extending, and integrating recent advances by our team in theory,
modeling, nano-fabrication and platform development. A combined theoretical and experi-
mental platform has been developed to understand the interplay between water ﬂux and ion
rejection in precisely-deﬁned nano-channels. Our innovative functionalization of solid state
nanoporous membranes with organic protein-mimetic polymers achieves 3-fold improvement
in water ﬂux over commercial RO membranes and has yielded a pending patent and indus-
trial interest. Our success has generated useful contributions to energy storage, nanoscience,
and membrane technology research and development important for national health and pros-
perity.
3

PAGE 4
Acknowledgment
We gratefully thank the LDRD program for funding that provided full or partial support
to a summer undergraduate student intern, four Sandia postdocs, and three postdocs and a
student at the U of New Mexico. We also thank the LDRD oﬃce for presenting this project
with the 2010 Award for Excellence. Finally, we are indebted to Prof. Eric Jakobsson and a
grant from the National Center for Supercomputing Applications at UIUC, which provided
compute time to our foreign national postdoc.
4

PAGE 5
Contents
1 Introduction 9
2 Thermodynamic Analysis of Membrane Separations Processes 13
Equilibrium Energy Cost Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Energy Costs from Nonequilibrium Transport Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Standard Test Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Example Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3 Chemical and Structural Basis for Selectivity and Water Flux 27
Pressure-Driven Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Eﬀect of Pore Functionality on Ion Rejection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Tuning Pore Hydrophobicity and Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Salt Concentration and pH Dependence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
Origins of the Dual Acidity Observed in Silica Membranes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4 Biomimetic High-Flux Desalination Membrane Based On Self-Assembled
Nanopores Tuned by Atomic Layer Deposition 45
Materials and Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5 Conclusions 53
5

PAGE 6
References 56
6

PAGE 7
List of Figures
2.1 Process pipeline for an RO facility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.2 Thermodynamic cycle for the RO process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.3 Isolines of ϵ, the energy loss per log concentration ratio per required ﬂux as a
function of measured salt rejection and mass ﬂux. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.1 NaCl translocation through dipolar nanopores under hydrostatic pressure . . . 28
3.2 NaCl translocation through decorated nanopores under hydrostatic pressure . 29
3.3 Variation in water contact angle and channel ﬂux with surface hydrophobicity 36
3.4 Representative snapshot of a silica pore simulated under periodic boundary
conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.5 Eﬀect of water force ﬁelds on the diﬀusion coeﬃcients (top) and occupancies
of water molecules (bottom) inside silica pores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.6 Eﬀect of the degree of methylation on the diﬀusion coeﬃcients and occupancies
of water molecules inside silica pores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
3.7 Eﬀect of pore size on the diﬀusion coeﬃcients and occupancies of water
molecules inside silica pores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
3.8 Zeta potential measurement of mesoporous silica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
3.9 Eﬀect of salt concentration and pH on ionic current through silica nanopores. 42
3.10 Deprotonation potential of mean force and pKa. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.1 FTIR-ATR Spectra for APS Pretreatment of Anodiscs R⃝ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.2 FTIR spectra of samples before and after ALD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
4.3 Variation of membrane characteristics with increasing number of ALD cycles . 49
4.4 Comparison between ALD membrane and commercial DOW membrane . . . . . 50
7

PAGE 8
List of Tables
2.1 Dow membrane permeability analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
8

PAGE 9
Chapter 1
Introduction
Lack of potable water plagues half the world’s population, causing death, disease, and in-
ternational tension. Furthermore, energy and water are inextricably and reciprocally linked,
with production of one requiring use of the other. The best current solution to clean water
lies in reverse osmosis (RO) membranes that remove salts from water with applied pressure,
but this technology is mature and expensive. Furthermore, the water produced lacks elec-
trolytes important to health. The high cost lies in gathering together and concentrating salt,
sodium and chloride ions, by forcing saline water through a membrane to recover puriﬁed wa-
ter on the other side. Incremental improvements, based on engineering solutions rather than
fundamental changes to widely used polymeric materials, have yielded only modest gains in
reverse osmosis performance over the last 25 years. In order to progress, a breakthrough in
materials research is needed.
To achieve a potential breakthrough in reverse osmosis membrane design, we have pursued
a fundamental research and development eﬀort that exploits and extends recent advances by
our team in theory, modeling, nano-fabrication and platform development. We developed
a combined theoretical and experimental platform that enabled us to probe the interplay
between water ﬂux and ion rejection in precisely-deﬁned inorganic nano-channels. Inspired
by water- and electrolyte-selective protein channels in biological membranes, we investigated
the molecular design principles of natural systems that ﬁlter water far more eﬃciently than
conventional RO membranes. In contrast to the active site architecture formed by thin dense
polymer coatings on commercial RO membranes, biological cell membranes demonstrate fast
water ﬂux and selective ion rejection through nanopores at low applied pressure.
With molecular modeling, we identiﬁed three key mechanisms used by nature for selecting
speciﬁc ions for transport across a cell membrane. Each mechanism of selective ion binding
shared a common structural feature – binding sites. We found that binding sites composed of
dipolar functional groups with speciﬁc architectural characteristics can stabilize speciﬁc ions
for permeation across natural membranes. Furthermore, properties of a binding site can be
tuned without changing its structure simply by modulating the charge-response properties
of the surrounding environment. Comparison with the crystal structure of biological water-
selective channels showed a distinct absence of ion binding sites in the water permeation
pathway. Natural water channels instead contain a collection of dipoles, alternating in
direction, and mixed with greasy hydrophobic groups lining the channel walls.
Our eﬀorts to transcribe nature’s structural design features into robust synthetic porous
9

PAGE 10
membranes produced ﬁve models of biomimetic pores nanofabricated using self-assembly
and novel atomic-layer deposition strategies (ALD). Our experimental and theoretical plat-
forms allowed successive modiﬁcation of pore size and surface chemistry and charge, fol-
lowed by measurements of pore structure and selective transport function to deduce struc-
ture/transport property relationships in the inorganic nanopores. We found that purely
hydrophobic pores, as achieved with trimethyl silane coverage, fully inhibited water trans-
port. As in the natural water-selective channel proteins, partially hydrophilic pore surfaces
are required to provide ‘binding sites’ that stabilize water molecules, increase diﬀusion, and
increase water ﬂux across the membrane. Furthermore, narrow pores with diameters in the
nanometer length scale or smaller are required for ion rejection functionality because large
pores stabilize ions by permitting counterions and water molecules to permeate with the
ions.
Both theoretical and experimental investigations yielded further scientiﬁc insights as to
the reactivity of titratable walls due to the conﬁning geometry of a nanoporous space. Con-
trary to the expectation that more conﬁned water in a nanopore exhibits a lower dielectric
constant and hence renders the ionization reaction involved in deprotonation of a silanol sur-
face less favorable, ab initio molecular dynamics simulations showed the opposite. Reducing
the diameter between two ﬂat walls covered with silanol groups produced a decrease in pKa,
which is associated with enhanced reactivity of the walls.
In the ﬁnal fabrication of organic modiﬁed nanopores by self-assembly and plasma-
assisted atomic layer deposition (ALD), we synthesized nanopores with multiple organic sur-
face derivatizations to more closely mimic the structure of water-selective protein channels in
cell membranes. In these channels, a polyamide network composed of opposing dipoles from
carbonyl and amine groups, with greasy hydrophobic groups in between, stretch across the
nanopores. The pores notably lack well-deﬁned ion binding sites characteristic of ion-selective
biological channels. Gas permeance measurements conﬁrmed the presence of a nanoporous
structure. In a side-by-side comparison of performance between our ALD polypeptide mem-
branes and DOW commercial membranes, the ALD membranes maintained high enough
salt rejection to produce drinking water, yet outperformed the commercial membranes by as
much as a factor of three in terms of water ﬂux.
Scientiﬁc insight gained by establishing structure/transport property relationships in
nanopores will inform new membrane processing strategies amenable to economic large-scale
manufacturing. With guidance from world-wide experts in macroscopic membranes, our
microscopic membranes will have the potential to be scaled up into practical systems that
could enhance the quantity of fresh water supplies at an aﬀordable cost for the nation and
the world, thus directly furthering Sandia’s commitment to water, energy, national security,
and public health issues.
A goal of future work is to scale up our system to high-pressure large-membrane for-
mats. Small-scale systems utilizing our novel platform and focusing on transport at the
individual pore level are mandatory for design, fabrication, characterization and simulation
of the microporous selectivity ﬁlter. Similar fabrication strategies can be employed for larger
scale anodisc alumina (AO) membranes. During the project, we demonstrated ALD modi-
10

PAGE 11
ﬁcation of larger-scale, AO-supported mesoporous silica membranes. Surface-conﬁned ALD
deposition of a hybrid ﬁlm followed by removal of the organic template resulted in a microp-
orous membrane with a record high combination of ﬂux and selectivity for gas molecules[9].
Scale-up to technologically-relevant systems requires compatibility with polymeric supports.
One approach is the development of reverse phase mesoporous materials, which have or-
ganic frameworks and hydrophilic pores. Another is the metal-organic framework materials
(MOFs). MOFs spontaneously assemble at room temperature from linkers and connectors
much like tinker toys. Their pore size can be tailored by the linker/connector chemistry.
MIL-101 and super tetrahedron (ST) MOF have pore diameters of 2.9-3.4 nm and 0.86 nm,
respectively. A critical issue is whether MOFs can be prepared as defect-free ﬁlms. Future
scale-up activities can be aided by collaboration with UOP, a leading expert in spiral wound
membrane modules, and will include surfactant-templated oxides and ALD deposition on
asymmetric cellulose acetate membranes.
This report begins with an analysis of desalination energy requirements in order to quan-
tify the potential for future improvements in desalination membrane technology. The ther-
modynamic analysis of the ﬁrst chapter makes it possible to draw conclusions from the
vast array of equilibrium molecular dynamics simulations present in the literature as well
as create a standardized comparison for measuring and reporting experimental RO mate-
rial eﬃciency. Commonly employed methods for estimating minimum desalination energy
costs have been revised to include operations at positive input stream recovery ratios using
a thermodynamic cycle analogous to the Carnot cycle. Several gaps in the statistical me-
chanical theory of irreversible processes have also been identiﬁed, which may in the future
lead to improved communication between materials engineering models and statistical me-
chanical simulation. Simulation results for silica surfaces and nanochannels are summarized
in the following chapter. We next review our progress on experimental design and testing
of nanoporous RO materials via templating and atomic layer deposition (ALD). We ﬁnd
that the eﬃciency of these nanoporous membranes is more than double that of currently
available membrane technology for brackish water desalination due to the improved mem-
brane ﬂux and salt rejection at low pressure. Finally, we summarize our conclusions and
future work. The creation and evaluation of a novel material platform for RO desalination
operating through a templated nanoporous structure has resulted in higher salt rejection at
lower applied pressure. This is an important advance because traditional materials operating
through diﬀusion-based mechanisms require high pressures to prevent salt passage.
Full descriptions of the technical and conceptual advances made in this project can be
found in a Technical Advance ﬁled with Sandia and articles published in these journals:
J. Am Chem. Soc. [9, 46, 16, 17], J. Mol. Biol. [48], J. Comput. Theor. Nanosci. [18, 25],
J. Chem. Phys. [51, 19, 37], Nature Materials [3], Nature Nanotech[27], SMALL[35], MRS
Bull.[4], Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. (Communication) [38], Biophys. J. [47], J. Chem.
Theory Comput.[49], Chem. Phys. Lett. (Frontiers Article) [2], and J. Membrane Sci. [50].
11

PAGE 12
12

PAGE 13
Chapter 2
Thermodynamic Analysis of
Membrane Separations Processes
Water permeable, salt excluding membranes carry enormous potential for making drink-
ing water available through reverse osmosis (RO) and generating energy from saltwater
mixing through forward osmosis. However, several factors limit the eﬃciency of the mechan-
ical to chemical potential energy conversion process, including hydraulic pump eﬃciency,
recovery of pressure energy from waste water, uncontrolled mixing of saline and fresh water,
and ﬂuid ﬂow resistance of the RO membrane. Along with the thermodynamic cost of solute
concentration, these combine to make energy the largest component of the operating cost for
seawater desalination facilities[34, 1, 36, 26]. Recent advances in pressure recovery devices
have placed the energy conversion eﬃciency of the mechanical components (hydraulic pump
and pressure recovery) in the 85-89% range[42, 1]. Taking example data from the Perth de-
salination plant[43], the pressure drop across the RO membrane accounts for 1.85 kWh/m 3
of the total desalination energy budget, while 0.4 kWh/m 3 is lost to mechanical eﬃciency,
and a remaining 1.2 kWh/m 3 is used for pre/post treatment and transport throughout the
facility.
Comparing the energy cost arising from the membrane pressure drop to the thermo-
dynamic energy cost of 1.1 kWh/m 3 for concentrating dissolved salts in seawater at 44%
recovery (calculation method shown in the next section), it is clear that improved membrane
materials have a large potential impact on desalination and energy recovery prospects. Typ-
ical thin ﬁlm composite aromatic polyamide with a polysulfone support and asymmetric
cellulose triacetate materials have relative resistances of 0.7 and 2.5 h· bar/cm[40, 12, 39].
While signiﬁcant eﬀort has gone into additional treatments to improve these materials, im-
provements in membrane material performance have been slowing, thus motivating a search
for viable alternatives to traditional polymer-based membranes. Zeolite-based membrane
materials[23, 22] have been considered, but show too high resistance.
Equilibrium Energy Cost Analysis
RO membranes convert mechanical (pressure) energy into chemical energy by concentrat-
ing saline solutions. This section will show a reversible thermodynamic cycle for carrying
13

PAGE 14
out this process – relating it to a Carnot cycle where chemical potential is substituted for the
heat source. The most important result from this analysis is a lower bound on the energy
required for any process used for desalination.
E
Vin
= RT [(1− x)co ln co + xcw ln cw− ci ln ci] (2.1)
In this equation, the process is assumed to use Vin m3 of input water with a solute concentra-
tion of ci moles of solute (or equivalent moles of dissociated electrolyte) per m 3 and produce
xVin m3 of waste water at a concentration of cw > ci and (1− x)Vin m3 of puriﬁed water at
concentration co. Conservation of mass implies the rejection rate is x = (ci− co)/(cw− co),
and the recovery rate is 1− x.
input
waste out
outputpressure exchanger
RO membrane
Figure 2.1. Process pipeline for an RO facility. Input
water is pressurized using mechanical energy and recycled
pressure energy recovered from the eﬄuent stream. It ﬂows
to the RO membranes, where the pressure is converted into
chemical energy by concentrating the waste-water.
The reverse osmosis membrane operates inside of an industrial process that generates the
required work and transports the working solutions. Ideally, all the energy added to the ﬂuid
can be recovered except what is consumed by the RO membrane using “perfect” pressure and
heat exchangers. In reality, the input pump is only 80-90% eﬃcient, the pressure exchanger
is 80-95% eﬃcient, and a steady rate of pressure and heat leakage occurs throughout the
pipeline. Current RO desalination plants report that 50-65% of the operating energy (around
2 kW-h / m 3) is consumed in the RO membrane unit[1].
Figure 2.2 shows a cycle operating between two sets of working conditions (input at
ci in the lower half, waste output at cw in the upper half). A constant total volume Vtot
is maintained throughout and no expansion / compression of the ﬂuid takes place, so all
variables have been made into volume fractions via division by Vtot. The cycle begins by
14

PAGE 15
4 3
1 2
∆  =55.5
∆  =27.8
cw co
ci co
output x∆V
as waste
input ∆V
of seawater
Figure 2.2. Thermodynamic cycle for the RO membrane
chemical potential / pressure conversion engine. Osmotic
pressure diﬀerences are based on seawater to drinking water
conversion at 50% recovery.
pulling a volume fraction ∆ v of input at a constant concentration and osmotic pressure
diﬀerence – a process requiring zero work, but increasing the potential energy of the enclosed
volume. This step is analogous to heat transfer in the Carnot cycle. Next, the left-hand side
volume, vI is compressed, lowering its volume by an amount ∆vc during step 2→ 3. A waste
volume of x∆v is ejected during step 3 → 4 (again at constant concentration and osmotic
pressure diﬀerence), reducing the total desalinated water output of the cycle to (1 − x)∆v.
Finally, the input osmotic pressure diﬀerence is restored by extracting work from the device.
The eight volume fractions at steps 1–4 can be calculated from four total volume con-
straints ( vI + vII = 1), two number constraints ( N(1) = N(4), N(2) = N(3)), and the
choices ∆v, ∆vc. Writing the number constraints ascI(n)vI(n)+cII (n)vII (n) = vI(n)(cI(n)−
cII (n)) + cII (n), vI(n) are the solutions to four linear equations.
vI(1) = vI(2)− ∆v
vI(2) = ∆vc
1− x
vI(3) = xvI(2)
vI(4) = xvI(1) = vI(3)− x∆v (2.2)
These solutions verify the consistency of the above cycle, since a solution exists where all
volume fractions are positive when x∈ (0, 1).
The energy added to the system during each leg can be computed by assigning a potential
energy to each step. To derive this, imagine dissipating all the stored energy from a given
state (vI @ cI, vII @ cII ). This can be done reversibly by allowing the membrane to relax
15

PAGE 16
at constant N, giving oﬀ work
E/Vtot = RT
∫ vf
I
vI
cIvI
v − cII vII
v dv
= RT
(
cIvI ln vf
I
vI
+ cII vII ln vf
II
vII
)
, (2.3)
where cI(v) = (cIvI)/v and cII (v) = (cII vII )/v are equal at the point of zero potential energy,
vf
I = cIvI/(cIvI + cII vII ). This makes the potential energy of any state equal to
E/Vtot = N
Vtot
ln N
Vtot
− cIvI ln cI− cII vII ln cII . (2.4)
The total work required to run the cycle is given by the energy diﬀerences E(3)− E(2) +
E(1)− E(4) and must balance the “chemical” energy put into the system during the volume
ﬂow steps. The energy of the concentration step 2 → 3 is
E2→3/Vtot = RT ∆vc
1− x ((1− x)co ln co + xcw ln cw− ci ln ci) . (2.5)
This expression also agrees with the energy requirement of a reversible path outlined in
Ref. [21], where nI is held ﬁxed while work is done to vary the volume (solute-impermeable
membrane) and then an entropy of mixing is added to make cI = cw and cII = co. It
also shows that this step is the only one that must be considered for calculating desalination
energy requirements, since its energy is identical to Eq. 2.1 when the output volume ∆V (1−x)
is replaced with ∆ vc. Finally, the work released during 4 → 1 is
E4→1/Vtot = RT
(
∆V− ∆vc
1− x
)
((1− x)co ln co + xcw ln cw− ci ln ci) , (2.6)
proving Eq. 2.1.
As an example calculation, consider a desalination process taking in seawater at 1.12
equivalents, operating at 50% recovery, and producing mineral water at 250 mg/L (6.7e-3
equivalents assuming a KCl standard at 74.5513 g/mol). The waste concentration will be
cw=2.23 equivalents, the osmotic pressure diﬀerence at steps 1 and 2 is 27.77 bar and 55.54
bar at steps 3 and 4. In this case, Eq. 2.1 gives an energy requirement of 0.522 kW-h / m 3
of input (1.04 per m 3 of output) at 300 K 1.
We can now apply all the standard eﬃciency arguments used by Carnot using the re-
versible cycle above. Importantly, the above represents a maximum eﬃciency process. To
apply the traditional argument, suppose another desalination process were discovered that
used less energy than predicted by Eq. 2.1. In this case, we could make most servicable
use of its eﬄuent by using it as fuel for running our cycle in reverse. The net work pro-
duced in cycle 2.2 would then be greater than was put into the initial eﬄuent production.
Equation 2.1 is therefore a theoretical lower limit on the energy requirement of desalination.
1The thermal energy scale in these units is RT = 0.69287 kW-h/m3 / (mol./L)
16

PAGE 17
If a constant concentration is maintained, and x→ 1, L’Hˆ opital’s rule can be used to
calculate the limit of Eq. 2.1 divided by 1 − x to cast it in terms of output volume.
lim
x→1
E
Vout
= RT
[
ci− co
(
1 + ln ci
co
)]
(2.7)
This is equal to the usual osmotic pressure diﬀerence less a term accounting for the potential
energy lost from mixing, causing the process to require less work. For the example above,
the extra term is -0.0237 kW-h/m 3, making the total cost at inﬁnitesimal recovery equal to
0.7476 kW-h/m3.
The reversible thermodynamic cycle of this section shows the connection between al-
ternate ways of understanding osmosis and is closely related to the industrial desalination
process. All cycles operating between equilibrium states can be solved by writing out the
state functions for each intermediate. This was accomplished here via Eq. 2.4, which can
be easily modiﬁed for non-ideal osmotic pressure by substituting the equation of state Π( ρ)
into Eq. 2.3. A connection with the Carnot cycle was made in which it is possible to view
desalination as an refrigerator whose coeﬃcient of performance depends on the membrane
salt rejection. These results are valid for arbitrary input water recovery ratio, and do not
require consideration of vapor equilibria [15].
Energy Costs from Nonequilibrium Transport Theories
Background
In a seminal work by Mr. Staverman in 1951 [41] the linear, local equilibrium approxima-
tion of nonequilibrium thermodynamics was applied to the problem of membrane transport
in the presence of mechanical (pressure), osmotic, and electrical driving forces. The linear
transport theory was uniﬁed by Onsager some 20 years earlier [32] and is notable for its abil-
ity to synthesize empirical relationships long known to engineering[8]. Pursuing the theory is
important, however, since it provides a path toward a nonequilibrium statistical mechanics
with which to express transport coeﬃcients from microscopic averages.
The usual Onsager expression assumes the ﬂuxes, j, are proportional to thermodynamic
driving forces through the conductivity coeﬃcients, L.
[ jS
jW
]
=−
[ LS LSW
LWS LW
]
·
[∂µS
∂x∂µW
∂x
]
The chemical potential,
βµi(x) = ln ρi(x)Λ3
i
sint
i
+ βµex
i , (2.8)
need not be constant throughout the system when it is out of equilibrium. A useful approx-
imation to the chemical potential is given by explicitly considering its voltage and pressure-
17

PAGE 18
dependence and then assuming the activity coeﬃcient γi is a function of local solution com-
position only.
µi = µ0
i + β−1 ln(γiρi) + qiψ(x) + ViP (x)
≡ µc
i(x) + qiψ(x) + ViP (x) (2.9)
Assuming no net local charge is built up, voltage diﬀerences are approximately zero and
don’t contribute to the above. Separating the pressure into its own column and writing out
the volume ﬂux, jV = VSjS + VW jW ,


jS
jW
jV

 =−


LS LSW LSP
LWS LW LWP
LPS LPW LP

·


∂µc
S
∂x∂µc
W
∂x∂P
∂x

 .
This equation deﬁnes LSP = LSVS + LSW VW (read across), and LPW = VSLSW + VW LW
(read down), etc.
Next, integrate over a line crossing the membrane (assuming constant ﬂux in this direction
in the steady-state). This converts the coeﬃcients on the right to average coeﬃcients, and
the ∂
∂x -s to ∆-s. According to Ref. [21], the concentration-dependence of the water chemical
potential diﬀerence is equivalent to−VW ∆Π, the energy diﬀerence due to osmotic pressure.


jS
jW
jV

 =−


lS lSW lSP
lWS lW lWP
lPS lPW lP

·


∆µc
S
−VW ∆Π
∆P

 (2.10)
Neglecting the contribution to the ﬂux due to the salt chemical potential diﬀerence, we
get
jV≃ lPW VW ∆Π− lP ∆P
=−lP (∆P− σ∆Π) (2.11)
σ≡ VW lPW /lP . (2.12)
This says that the membrane ﬂux is proportional to an eﬀective pressure diﬀerence. The
eﬀective pressure diﬀerence is smaller than ∆ P by the Staverman reﬂection coeﬃcient[41]
times the osmotic pressure diﬀerence, ∆Π. For perfect salt rejection, σ = 1 and osmosis can
take place. If the membrane doesn’t reject salt, jV is less sensitive to ∆Π.
To ﬁnd the relationship between σ and the usual salt rejection, solve for ∆ P in terms of
∆µc, jV to give an equation equivalent to Eq. 2.10.


jS
jW
−∆P

 =


lSPlP S
lP
− lS
lSPlP W
lP
− lSW lSP /lP
lW PlP S
lP
− lWS
lW PlP W
lP
− lW lWP /lP
lPS /lP lPW /lP 1/lP

·


∆µc
S
−VW ∆Π
jV


18

PAGE 19
Distributing the minus signs and VW into the coeﬃcients, assuming Onsager reciprocity (i.e.
the L matrix is symmetric)[32, 41] 2, and substituting the deﬁnition of σ, we ﬁnd


jS
jW
∆P

 =


−σlS + (1− σ)lSW
VW
VS
−σVSlS + (1− σ)VW lSW
1−σ
VS
−σlWS + (1− σ)lW
VW
VS
−σVSlWS + (1− σ)VW lW
σ
VW
− 1−σ
VS
σ −1/lP

·


∆µc
S
∆Π
jV


To ﬁnd the salt rejection, we use the concentration of salt in the volume ﬂux at zero
osmotic pressure diﬀerence.
jS
jV
= 1− σ
VS
= (1− r)ρI
S
⇒ σ = 1− VSρI
S(1− r) (2.13)
For perfect salt rejection, σ = 1, while for zero salt rejection, σ = 1− VSρI
S is less than one –
showing a tendancy for the concentrated side to back-ﬂow, diﬀusing toward the lower osmotic
pressure region. However, VS≈ 16.6 mL/mol and a 37 g/L NaCl solution has VSρ = 0.01.
Saturation is about 10× higher, so even at zero salt rejection, the reﬂection coeﬃcient, σ,
cannot possibly drop below 0 .9, and is usually higher than 0 .99.
Using Eq.s 2.11 and 2.13, the membrane permeability, lP , can be calculated for experi-
mental data when the applied pressure, salt rejection, and input salt concentration are known
experimentally.
At this point it is also possible to set an upper boundary on the permeability by consider-
ing the resistance caused by the drag of the rejected ions on the permeant ﬂuid. Because the
membrane is hindering the ﬂow of ions, they are moving slower than the surrounding ﬂuid.
Collisions will tend to push the ions toward the membrane, while deﬂected molecules from
the permeating ﬂuid reduce the ﬂuid’s forward momentum and increase its temperature.
When the current has reached a steady-state, the average force exterted by the ion on the
ﬂuid will equal the drag force on an ion moved through a stationary ﬂuid. The total drag
resistance on a ﬂuid forced to move past nbound/A frozen ions per unit area will therefore be
Rdrag = Fdragnbound/A
jV
. (2.14)
Diﬀusion constants, D, for electrolytes in aqueous solutions have been well studied, and
are related to the drag force through the friction constant, γ. Requiring balance between ex-
ternal forces and diﬀusion at equilibrium, Einstein showed mγ = RT /D. Using the Langevin
equation[14],
mdu
dt = R(t) + Fext− mγu,
(where⟨u⟩ = jV , the average ﬂow velocity), it is also possible to show that the solution
resistance to an applied electric force leads to a proportionality between the diﬀusion constant
2This assumption must hold for inﬁnitesimal deviations from equilibrium, but see Ref. [7] for a coun-
terexample in far from equilibrium conditions.
19

PAGE 20
and the conductivity, Λ [24].
D = RT
F 2
Λ
|z| (2.15)
At a steady-state, the number of ions causing ﬂuid drag will remain constant, and mγ⟨u⟩
must equal the average force exerted on the ion by the membrane, causing a drag on solution.
Therefore
Fdrag = mγjV . (2.16)
Substituting the density of bound ions times a characteristic height, d, for the layer of bound
ions, we arrive at a minimum resistance.
Rdrag = mγdρbound = RT dρbound
D (2.17)
Assuming a boundary height of d = 10 ˚A and a solute concentration of 0.1 mol/L and
using diﬀusion constants 1.334e-5 and 2.032e-5 cm 2/s for Na+ and Cl− leads to a maximum
permeability on the order of 10 5 bar·h/cm.
While the CRC Handbook lists ionic diﬀusion constants at inﬁnite dilution, it is possible
to infer diﬀusion constants in alternate experimental conditions using the Stokes-Einstein
relation, mγ≈ 6πηr along with a table of solution viscosities. The viscosity of water at
20◦C increases from 1.002 cP to 1.068 cP as the salt concentration increases from zero to 0.7
mol/L NaCl, while a 5◦ shift to 25◦C decreases the viscosity to 0.89 cP[24]. Temperature is
thus a much more important factor setting the limiting resistance.
This analysis clearly shows that resistance due to the rejected ions is not a limiting
factor as long as they remain in solution near the membrane. However, Chapter 4 gives
experimental evidence for the importance of solution boundary layer eﬀects, since doubling
the membrane thickness did not lead to the expected 50% decrease in conductivity. Therefore
more careful analyses are warranted. Further work using the solution to the Fokker-Planck
equations for steady state ﬂux at the experimental membrane geometry may be able to put
d· ρbound on more quantitative footing.
Standard Test Conditions
Comparing the eﬃciency of alternative materials for reverse osmosis requires identical
ﬂux rates, φreq, and salt concentrations {ci, co}. Under identical test conditions it becomes
meaningful to compare the net work done on the ﬂuid, which is governed by the pressure
drop across the membrane
Ereq
Vout
= ∆Preq. (2.18)
Calculating the required energy per unit output at standard conditions requires making two
basic assumptions similar in spirit to Ohm’s law: the membrane resistance is proportional
to both the permeate ﬂux and the membrane thickness.
20

PAGE 21
To relate experimental conditions at constant pressure diﬀerence to those at constant
ﬂux, we make the assumption that the ﬂux scales linearly with the pressure diﬀerence as in
Eq. 2.11. Next, use the experimentally observed ﬂux to infer a ﬂux at the required concen-
tration diﬀerence by imagining we carried out an identical experiment with α membranes
stacked in series so that the “membrane height,” L, becomes
L′ = αL
and
φ′ = φ/α
l′
p = lP /α
c′
o
ci
= (1− r)α (2.19)
The last equation further assumes that the salt rejection is independent of the input con-
centration so that, for example, when α = 2, then c′
o/ci = co/ci× c′
o/co = (1− r)(1− r).
For a given ci,req/co,req, we scale the ﬂux by solving for α (assuming the relation holds for
concentrations in the range co–ci).
α = ln ci,req/co,req
− ln(1− r) (2.20)
Now substituting the scaling relation (2.11) in the energy requirement (2.18) and taking
the absolute value of all pressure diﬀerences gives the energy requirement for carrying out a
desalination process at an arbitrary ﬂux, φreq, to yield a required osmotic pressure diﬀerence,
∆Πreq.
Ereq
Voutφreq
=|∆Preq
φreq
= 1
lP
+ σ|∆Πreq|
φreq
= α
lP,expt
+ σ|∆Πreq
φreq| (2.21)
Example Application
Mesoporous silica modiﬁed by 6 atomic layer deposition (ALD) cycles of trimethoxysi-
lane (TMOS) followed by 16 cycles of aminopropylsilane (APS) deposition to make NH 2
functionalized nanopores has shown rejection ratios around r=31% with a ﬂux around φm
= 1.8 g / cm 2 h. Converting units to a volume ﬂux gives
φ
(m
h
)
= φm
( g
cm2 h
)
×
( 1 L
1000 g H 2O + co/2 mol. NaCl × 58.443 g NaCl / mol. NaCl
)
× 10−3
(m3
L
)
× 104
(cm2
m2
)
= φm
100.0 + 2.922co
. (2.22)
21

PAGE 22
Converting the pressure to energy units gives
P
(kW-h
m3
)
= P (psi)× 6.8947573· 10−2
(bar
psi
)
×
( 1 kW-h
3.6· 106 J
)
× 102
( J
L-bar
)
× 103
( L
m3
)
= P (psi)× 6.8947573· 10−2
(bar
psi
)
×
(1 kW-h/m3
36 bar
)
(2.23)
= P (psi)× 1.91521· 10−3
(kW-h/m3
psi
)
. (2.24)
For{ci = 0.1711, co = 0.118} equivalents / L, φ = 0.018 m/h and Π expt = RT× r× ci =
0.03675 kW-h/m3 3 . The ﬂux per over-pressure is lP = 0.154 (indicating that over-pressure
must be 6.5 times the ﬂow rate in m/h).
Choosing to run this experiment between concentrations ci = 1 .12 and co = 6 .7· 10−3
equiv./L requires α = 13 .8 separation stages, and an energy requirement per desired ﬂow
rate of Ereq
Voutφreq
= 89.6 + 0.77
φreq
. (2.25)
Based on the form of Eq. 2.21, the minimum required energy is just the osmotic pressure
diﬀerence as expected, while the ﬂow rate per over-pressure consumes extra energy and lowers
the device eﬃciency. Maximum eﬃciency would be achieved at zero resistance, where lP→
∞ and the ﬁrst term disappears. In this experimental setup, therefore, the eﬃciency can
simply be measured by the ratio α/lP . To make this independent of the target concentration
ratio, we can divide by ln ci/co
ϵ≡ α
lP ln ci/co
= (−lP ln(1− r))−1. (2.26)
The energy loss Eq. 2.21 can be expressed in terms of ϵ as
Ereq/V− σ|∆Πreq|
φreq
= ϵ ln ci/co. (2.27)
Eq. 2.27 shows that the energy loss metric, ϵ, can be directly interpreted as a ﬂow resistance
for 1− e−1 percent rejection.
A plot of ϵ contours vs. r and φm is shown in Fig. 2.3. The experimental conditions are
assumed to be ci = 5 g/L NaCl, ∆ P = 80 psi. This plot shows the relative importance of
salt rejection and ﬂux on the separation resistance.
Results
In this section, we apply the local equilibrium transport theory of the last two sections
to experimental measurements in order to calculate relative material eﬃciencies.
3The thermal energy scale at 300 K in these units is RT = 0.69287 kW-h/m3 / (mol/L)
22

PAGE 23
 0  20  40  60  80  100
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
φm (g/cm2 h)
20
7
3
1
0.5
0.1
r (%)
Figure 2.3. Isolines of ϵ, the energy loss per log concen-
tration ratio per required ﬂux as a function of measured salt
rejection and mass ﬂux.
Typical performances for asymmetric cellulose di- and tri-acetate membranes have been
reported in Fig. 2 of Ref. [12]. 4 As the preparations are altered, they ﬁnd an empirical
relationship close to jV =−15.14343865r + 16.25638044 cm/h for pure water permeability
and 17 bar operating pressure. Since VSρS = 10−3 is negligible under these conditions, σ≈ 1
and lP≈ 0.956− 0.891r. According to the energy loss coeﬃcient,
ϵ = (−lP ln(1− r))−1 , (2.28)
the best eﬃciency point is found at a rejection ratio r = 0.715 and permeability lP = 0.319
cm/h-bar, where the standard resistance is ϵ = 2 .50 bar/(cm/h). However, no membrane
was shown at this point in their diagram, and the closest in eﬃciency is found to be at a
salt rejection ratio of r = 0.8, and water permeability of lP = 0.256 cm/h-bar with standard
resistance ϵ = 2.42 bar/(cm/h), which is slightly better than the predicted minimum. For a
system operating at 30 g/L input concentration (seawater concentration) and 68 bar pressure,
the best eﬃciency was at r = 0.84, lP = 0.109 cm/h-bar and standard resistance ϵ = 5.01
bar/(cm/h).
According to FILMTEC TM5 materials, SW30HRLE-400 can be run at 32 g NaCl/L and
55.16 bar to get a 99.8% salt rejection at a ﬂow rate of 3.16 cm/h. This implies lP = 0.113
cm/h-bar and ϵ = 1.42. Our tests on FILMTEC TM polyamide thin ﬁlm composite (TFC)
membrane (SW30HR) at lower concentration and pressure show slightly lower salt rejection,
4From the data in their Table 3, it can be inferred that the membrane area is 13 .2cm2.
5FILMTEC is a registered trademark of FilmTec, a subsidiary of Dow Chemical.
23

PAGE 24
and the FILMTEC TM technical manual notes the output concentration empirically varies
inversely to the membrane ﬂux. This cannot possibly hold at low ﬂux though, since then
the rejection ratio would become < 0! Our tests carried out at 5 g/L and 13.8 bar give 91%
rejection at 0.55 mL/h. Using the Filmtec manual’s permeability estimate of 0.279 cm/h-
bar, the eﬀective surface area is 0.2 cm 2, and ϵ = 1.49 bar/(cm/h). This is better than the
high-salt ϵ because the permeability decreases with added pressure.
Our amide-modiﬁed silica nanopores have much larger ﬂuxes. For example the 13.8 bar
point above has 86% rejection and a 10.25 cm/h ﬂux (assuming A=0.2 cm 2). These imply
a permeability of lP = 1 .011 cm/h-bar and standard resistance of ϵ = 0 .50 bar/(cm/h).
If it could be utilized in current seawater RO plants, the present membrane would drop
energy lost due to membrane resistance by 67% – some 0.469 kW-h/m 3, amounting to 26%
of the total ﬁrst-pass membrane-speciﬁc energy cost or $1 million/y. for a 100 ML/day RO
plant. Presently, however, the burst strength of the silica substrate is not yet high enough
to withstand the high-pressure operating conditions required for seawater.
The zeolite membranes reported in Ref. [22] have a rejection of 76.7% and 0.0112 cm/h
ﬂux at a salt concentration of 0.1 M NaCl and an applied pressure of 20.7 bar. This gives
an anomalously low permeability of 7× 10−4 cm/h-bar.
The carboxylic acid functionalized carbon nanotube (CNT) reported in Ref. [5] shows
a ﬂux of 37 cm/h for a 0.6 mM K 3Fe(CN)6 solution with a pressure of 0.69 bar. Salt
rejection for KCl is around 45% at this concentration, while the rejection of the bulkier
K3Fe(CN)6 at this ionic strength is around 98%. Even though this number decreases to zero
at concentrations above 10 mM, using these ﬁgures gives a permeability of 58 .72 cm/h-bar
and a tremendous eﬃciency. However these membranes have not yet shown high enough salt
rejection at reasonable operating conditions for brackish water desalination.
Dow maintains a wealth of product information on its website, and summary of membrane
permeabilities is given in the Table 2.
The permeabilities found in Table 2, in most cases, are larger than those calculated from
the design equations in Table 3.10 of the FILMTEC TM technical manual. For 2, 5, and 32 g
NaCl/L salinity these are 0.308, 0.279, and 0.124 cm/h ·bar, respectively. This is likely the
result of thinner polyamide ﬁlms employed in brackish water desalination. Unfortunately,
there is no test data available for FILMTECTM brackish water membranes at 5 g/L. However,
using the manual’s estimate for permeability decrease with increased solution concentration
from 2 to 5 g/L, we can expect a 10% increase in the standard resistance, ϵ, over the values
listed in Table 2.
Calculations of membrane ﬂux and standardized resistances using the thermodynamic
theory developed above have enabled a consistent comparison of membrane materials. In
order to decrease the standardized membrane resistance (increasing water permeability),
either higher ﬂux or greater salt rejection can be pursued, as shown in Fig. 2.3. Comparing
the optimal eﬃciency for each material gives an indication of the relative performance that
can be expected, and shows that current cellulose acetate materials are 2-3 times less eﬃcient
24

PAGE 25
Membrane Test Salinity
(g/L)
Test Pres-
sure (bar)
r lP (cm/h-
bar)
ϵ (h-bar/cm) Max Operat-
ing Pressure
(bar)XLE-440 0.5 6.9 99.0 0.757 0.287 41
LE-440i 2 10.3 99.3 0.567 0.355 41
LE-440 2 10.3 99.3 0.516 0.391 41
BW30LE-440 2 10.0 99.0 0.534 0.407 41
BW30HR-440i (new) 2 15.5 99.7 0.354 0.487 41
BW30XFR-400/34i 2 15.5 99.65 0.354 0.500 41
BW30-400-FR 2 15.3 99.5 0.328 0.576 41
BW30-365 2 15.3 99.5 0.325 0.581 41
BW30-365-FR 2 15.3 99.5 0.325 0.581 41
BW30-400(also 34i) 2 15.5 99.5 0.323 0.584 41
BW30-440i 2 15.5 99.5 0.322 0.587 41
SW30ULE (new) 32 55.0 99.7 0.167 1.032 83
SW30XLE (new) 32 55.16 99.7 0.137 1.259 83
SW30HRLE (new) 32 55.16 99.8 0.113 1.419 83
SW30XHR (new) 32 55.0 99.82 0.092 1.723 83
SW30XHR 32 55.16 99.8 0.091 1.763 83
Table 2.1. Dow membrane permeability analysis
than polyamide thin ﬁlm composites, which are on par with our novel nanoporous silica
membranes.
Variations in standardized resistances can also be seen when the assumptions (2.19) are
violated – that is salt rejection does not remain constant, or the membrane resistance is not
proportional to its height. In these cases, we gain information about variations in material
formulation that lead to diﬀerences in the underlying separation mechanism. Functionalized
carbon nanotubes [5] have not produced adequate salt rejection at high ionic strength, which
may be explained by a Donnan exclusion mechanism. Polyamide thin ﬁlm composite (TFC)
membranes exhibit increased rejection and resistance at high ﬂow rates and may indicate
contraction of the membrane. Directly varying membrane thickness by additional chemical
deposition cycles has not lead to a proportionate increase in resistance (Chapt. 4), a fact
which points to the importance of concentration polarization at the membrane boundary[28].
25

PAGE 26
26

PAGE 27
Chapter 3
Chemical and Structural Basis for
Selectivity and Water Flux
Our experiments show that the behavior of ions conﬁned within nanopores diﬀer signiﬁ-
cantly from that in free bulk solutions. Our theoretical studies show novel structural designs
that control ion passage through membranes. Based on these observations, new ideas will be
developed to help us design nanopores that permit fast transport of water and select ions,
thus providing novel solutions for energy-eﬃcient highly-selective membrane-based separa-
tion technology critical not only to water puriﬁcation, but also pertinent to electrical energy
storage applications in supercapacitors and lithium-ion batteries. Thus our work strongly
impacts Sandia’s missions in national energy security (eﬃcient separations) and public health
(clean, cheap water).
Pressure-Driven Flow
In an important theoretical success, we completed a study of pressure-driven water and
salt permeation through model nanopore membranes using non-equilibrium molecular dy-
namics (MD) simulations[18]. A dual-membrane model is applied, initially with one reservoir
ﬁlled with 1.0 M NaCl and the other with pure water (see Fig. 3.1). The surfaces of the
membrane and the 12 A diameter pore interior are smooth and hydrophilic, and the left-most
pore contains a dipolar layer that mimics hydroxylated silica surfaces at the pH of zero charge
and electrostatically repels Cl−[16]. Despite this anion-repulsive surface, at suﬃciently high
hydrostatic pressure ( 170 atm.), the membrane only achieves about 32% ion rejection; the
ions pass through the pore as Na +/Cl− pairs or larger aggregates (Fig. 3.1). At lower pres-
sures closer to the values used in desalination applications (68 atm.), salt rejection is higher,
about 70%. This pressure-dependence of salt rejection highlights the importance of moder-
ate pressures for high salt rejection. It also highlights potential pit-falls of MD simulations
that apply abnormally high pressures to observe water transport at shorter simulation time
scales.
We further decorated the entrance or interior of the dipolar nanopore with −|e| charged
spheres to mimic deprotonated carboxylate or silanol groups found in the systems studied
experimentally: carbon nanotubes or hydroxylated silica nanopores at neutral pH. Salt re-
27

PAGE 28
jection ratios are qualitatively similar to those found for the dipolar nanopores (above) at
corresponding applied pressures, indicating that the pressure-dependence of salt rejection
ratio is a general phenomenon even with decorated pore mouths (Fig. 3.2).
Figure 3.1. NaCl translocation through dipolar nanopores
under hydrostatic pressure. Cl− (green) at entrance, though
energetically unfavorable, crosses via ion pair formation with
Na+(blue). (a)-(c): sequential snapshots picoseconds apart.
The dual reservoir simulation cell is periodically replicated.
H2O molecules are depicted as red/white spheres.
Eﬀect of Pore Functionality on Ion Rejection
We achieved a signiﬁcant advance in understanding K+ over Na+ selectivity in two diverse
biological systems. Theoretical work by us using quantum mechanical models [45] established
two essential structural features of a potassium-selective biological ion channel: 1) binding
sites that can maintain speciﬁc high numbers of oxygen ligands ( > 6) for ion coordination;
2) a special local environment (0.5 nm radius) around the binding sites that lacks proton-
donor groups, which potentially could compete with a bound ion for its ligands. The high
numbers of ligands unexpectedly overcoordinate the permeant K + ion, apparently to avoid
trapping it. This new mechanistic resolution of cation selectivity has been described as
‘the caress of the surroundings, the crowding of the ligands’[11]. Ideas for translating this
mechanism into a synthetic membrane pore revolve around the new plasma-assisted atomic
layer deposition techniques recently developed by us [10] in conjunction with new molecular
imprinting strategies used successfully by us to fabricate sub-nm diameter pores selective
to small gas molecules (see below) [9]. We next examined a small molecule with similar
28

PAGE 29
Figure 3.2. NaCl translocation through other types of
nanopores, decorated with negative charges (brown spheres)
at the pore entrance (a) and in the pore interior (b & c)
to qualitatively mimic carbon nanotubes and hydroxylated
silica nanopores at neutral pH. In all cases, a high enough
hydrostatic pressure causes ion translation in ion pair/larger
aggregates. Lower pressures promote ion rejection.
selectivity characteristics toward K + over Na+ ions. This valinomycin molecule binds K +
with only 6 oxygen ligands. Our work established that valinomycin indeed selects between
cations using only 6 ligands. The essential structural feature for valinomycin selectivity is a
speciﬁc cavity size that ﬁts K+, not the smaller Na+[48]. Valinomycin enforces constraints on
cavity size using a combination of intramolecular hydrogen bonds and its speciﬁc ring size.
Compared to the K-channel mechanism, valinomycin tolerates the presence of hydrogen-
bond donors in itslocal neighborhood, as is evident from its persistent selectivity in solvents
of varying polarity. In addition, its complexation energy with K + is small in liquid water,
meaning that K + ions don’t get stuck inside the ring. Thus, we propose that valinomycin’s
mechanism may work well in a synthetic membrane conﬁguration either directly or through
a surrogate molecule. Cheap, simple sugar molecules called cyclodextrins could be encoded
with valinomycin’s structural features, and plugged into synthetic pores to create K +/Na+
selectivity. Cheap ways of incorporating such cation selectivity into desalination membranes
can save lives by providing essential minerals to desalinated drinking water.
To investigate the design rules for cation over anion selectivity, we extended our earlier
modeling work, which showed the attraction of silica nanopores for Na + ions even at the pH
of zero charge (PZC)[20]. To begin, we constructed two coarse-grained theoretical nanopore
models with smooth hydrophilic pores. One was a tube model of inﬁnite length with al-
ternate dipolar and non-dipolar stretches of length L/2. The other was a membrane model
29

PAGE 30
of ﬁnite length with dipole layers on the pore interior surface, but not on the membrane
surface. As L/2 increases, cations (Na +) populate the dipolar regions but anions (Cl −) are
excluded (selective cation/anion transport). For the membrane geometry, it is critical that
the pore interior surface and the membrane surface have diﬀerent dipole surface density to
achieve selectivity. Total cation/anion rejection can be attained in the tube geometry with
alternating dipolar layers. This work [16] suggests a new design for desalination membranes.
Tuning Pore Hydrophobicity and Size
Due to decreased ﬂow resistance, hydrophobic channels are expected to yield a higher
water ﬂux than hydrophilic ones. However, hydrophobicity may hinder water entrance and
require high pressure to force water through, adding to desalination energy costs. Similarly,
larger pore diameters are expected to yield higher water ﬂux, but may lack salt rejection
capabilities and hinder water puriﬁcation.
To investigate the tradeoﬀ between hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces, we performed
Grand Canonical Monte Carlo simulations to estimate the water content in silica nanopores
functionalized with varying amounts of hydrophobic trimethyl silane (TMS, -Si(CH 3)3)
groups, each replacing a hydrophobic surface silanol (-SiOH) group. Model silica pores with
approximate pore diameters of 10 and 15 Angstroms were created. Periodical boundary
conditions were applied so that membrane surfaces are excluded; only interior pore surfaces
exist, and 25 and 50% of the SiOH groups therein are replaced with TMS. We found that, at
equilibrium, despite the added hydrophobic coverage, the pore interiors are still ﬁlled with
water in all cases except the 10 A diameter and 50% TMS coverage model. As can be seen
in Fig. 3.4, continuous water passageways persist in these pores.
In contrast, full replacement of pore surface silanol groups with hydrophobic trimethyl
silane produces a large free energy cost for water occupation. This free energy penalty
for the fully hydrophobic pores prevents water entry without an external driving force,
and hinders water ﬂux under pressure-driven desalination conditions. Clearly water needs
some hydrophilic ‘binding sites’ to be stabilized in a narrow pore. Inspection of the crystal
structure of natural water channels (aquaporins) shows they contain a diversity of functional
groups on their walls: both hydrophilic polar groups of opposing dipoles (carbonyl and
amine) as well as hydrophobic groups. In Chapter 4, we describe how we translate this
functional diversity observed in natural water-selective channel proteins to create pores with
both high water ﬂux and high salt rejection.
Experimental investigations of hydrophobic pores conﬁrm the theoretical predictions.
Water ﬂux diminishes to zero as surface coverage with trimethyl silane increases to values
greater than 1.5 groups per square nm. Contact angles measured between water and ﬂat
silica surfaces show that the angle increases from 38 degrees, for the untreated hydrophilic
surface, to more than 90 degrees for trimethyl silane coverages greater than 1.5/nm 2. Such
a larger contact angle represents a repelling capillary force that further increases resistance
to water ﬂow. Water ﬂux further diminishes with reductions in pore size. In contrast, salt
30

PAGE 31
rejection increases with smaller pores. Theoretical predictions described below correlate
smaller water diﬀusion constants and reduced water occupancy with reduced pore sizes and
increased surface hydrophobicity (Fig. 3.3).
Water dynamics in silica pores Fig. 3.4 were investigated using molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations. Speciﬁcally, two diﬀerent properties of waters inside the pores were studied.
First, the diﬀusion coeﬃcients D(z) of water molecules were determined as a function of the
height along the pore axis, z, using
D(z) = lim
∆t→∞
⣨(
zi(t + ∆t)− zi(t)
)2⟩
2∆t ,
where,
z− ∆z
2 < zi(t)≤ z + ∆z
2
For these calculations, data was analyzed from 10 ns MD trajectories. The bin-width, ∆ z,
was set at 1 ˚A, and the magnitudes of time-intervals ∆ t were varied from 2 to 100 ps to
estimate the ∆ t→ ∞limiting case. Next, water occupancy proﬁles were estimated by
averaging the numbers of water molecules found in each bin during the 10 ns trajectory.
The eﬀect of water force ﬁelds on our predictions of water diﬀusion coeﬃcients and water
occupancy in a silica pore was studied by generating three separate trajectories, one using
an SPC/E water model, another using a TIP3P water model and the last one using an SPC
water model. The silica pore used for this analysis had a diameter of 15 ˚A, and almost half
of its pore facing hydroxyl groups (silanol, -SiOH) were substituted with tri-methyl groups
(50% hydrophobic with trimethyl silane, Si(CH 3)3). The eﬀect of water force ﬁeld on the
distribution of water molecules inside the pore was negligible, as seen in the occupancy
proﬁles of Fig. 3.5. Each water force ﬁeld yielded a noticeably diﬀerent diﬀusion coeﬃcient
proﬁle, but despite the diﬀerences, all water models consistently yielded a diﬀusion coeﬃcient
almost an order of magnitude smaller than the diﬀusion coeﬃcient in bulk water.
Reducing the total number of tri-methyl silane groups on the pore surface to reduce the
ratio of hydrophobic to hydroxyl groups from 50% to 25% doubled the diﬀusion coeﬃcient
of water molecules (Fig. 3.6). Nevertheless, the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of water molecules in
the pore still remained small in comparison to their values in bulk water. Reducing the
density of hydrophobic groups also increased the occupancy of water in the pore, but this
was perhaps because now there was more empty space in the pore due to the substitution of
larger -Si(CH3)3 groups with smaller -SiOH groups. Reducing the pore size, without altering
the ratio of tri-methyl over hydroxyl groups (50:50) reduced both the diﬀusion coeﬃcient
and the occupancy of water molecules in the silica pore (Fig. 3.7).
All MD simulations were carried out using the Lammps software. The following pa-
rameters were used to carry out simulations in an NVT ensemble: periodic boundaries in
all directions; the particle-particle particle-mesh (PPPM) method with a precision value of
0.0001 and a cut-oﬀ of 10 for computation of electrostatic interactions; twin-range cut-oﬀ
of 15/16 for van der Waals interactions; SPC/E charges and van der Waals parameters for
description of water models; all atom CHARMM charges and van der Waals parameters for
31

PAGE 32
description of silica atoms; an integration time-step of 2 fs; the SHAKE algorithm with a
tolerance of 0.0001 units to constrain the Si-O and O-H bonds in silica and all the bonds
and angles in water molecules; and a Berendsen method with a coupling constant of 0.1 ps
to maintain temperature at 298.15 K.
Further experiments were performed to study how a single hydrophilic functionality cor-
relates with salt rejection and water ﬂux (see also Chapter 4). Samples with -OH surfaces
consisted of mesoporous silica, made from Brij-56 lipid later removed with calcination, and
then treated to two cycles of liquid-phase atomic layer deposition (ALD) to yield 2.4 nm hy-
droxylated silica pores. Similar methods were used to generate surfaces with -NH 2, -CN, or
-SO3H functionalized pore surfaces. While nitrile surfaces produced improved water ﬂux and
charged surfaces produced higher salt rejection, overall, the singly functionalized hydrophilic
surfaces performed modestly in terms of salt rejection and water ﬂux.
To summarize, we ﬁnd with both experimental and theoretical approaches that some
hydrophilicity is required on the walls of nanopores to permit spontaneous water ﬁlling. More
hydrophilicity is associated with higher water occupancy, higher water diﬀusion constants
(but still smaller than in bulk liquid water), and experimental observations of higher water
ﬂux. While larger pores also yield higher water ﬂux, salt rejection is diminished. Small pores
functionalized with a single type of hydrophilic coating generally yield modest salt rejection
and water ﬂux and thus highlight the subtle design requirements used by natural pores to
achieve both fast water transport and perfect salt rejection.
Salt Concentration and pH Dependence
In this section we describe observations of surface-charge-dominated ion transport through
silica nanopores at very low salt concentrations. Surface charge plays an important role in
ion transport through nanopores with pore sizes smaller than the Debye screening length
(λ). We also observed that for pure HCl solution at pH=3, 4 or 5, where ion transport is
expected to be dominated by surface charge instead of the bulk solution ion concentration,
the ion conductance, and hence the silica surface charge at pH=3, is always higher than
those at pH=4. In contrast, on ﬂat silica, the surface charge at pH=4 should be higher
because the zero-surface-charge point (isoelectric point) for silica surface is at pH=2. We
hypothesize that the isoelectric point of silica may be shifted to higher values in nanopores.
Direct measurement of surface charge shows that the isoelectric point (a pH value for zero
surface charge) of the silica nanopore surface has shifted to higher pH values compared to a
free ﬂat silica surface (Fig. 3.8).
The ion current through nanopores was measured at diﬀerent salt solutions using a patch-
clamp system on a nanofabricated platform comprising a 50-100 nm aperture milled by
focused ion beam (FIB) and a 30-50 nm thick tunable mouth self-assembled nanoporous
(<3nm) layer coated on the FIBed aperture. We observe two unusual behaviors signiﬁcant
to desalination performance. 1) When the pore size is comparable to the Debye screening
32

PAGE 33
length for various salt concentrations, the ion currents at low concentrations are higher than
what we expect from a linear model (Fig. 3.9(a)), suggesting that the counter ions attracted
by the inherent pore surface charge to the pore surface vicinity is the main mechanism for
ion transport. 2) Based on a Debye length of 1.0 nm for a bulk solution of 0.1 M KCl, the
screening region should have occupied much of the pore (pore size =2.6 nm), and a transition
point to surface-charge-dominated ion transport should be observed at 0.1 M concentration.
Instead we observed a transition point at ∼0.01 M, suggesting that the Debye length inside
the 2-3 nm nanopore is smaller than that for a free bulk solution (Fig. 3.9(a)). We hypothesize
that the isoelectric point (a pH value for zero surface charge) of the silica nanopore surface
has shifted to higher pH values compared to a free ﬂat silica surface.
To follow-up on this hypothesis, zeta potentials (an indication of surface charge) of non-
porous silica were measured at diﬀerent pH (see Fig. 3.8a) The results show that the isoelec-
tric point for nanoporous silica is at pH=3-4, in contrast to pH=2.5 for a ﬂat silica surface.
This result has been further conﬁrmed by the KBr adsorption of nanopores at diﬀerent pH.
Fig. 3.8b shows the EDS elemental analysis for CTAB mesoporous silica ﬁlm soaked with
KBr solution at diﬀerent pH (adjusted by HCl addition) then air-dried. At pH=3, the ad-
sorbed ions are mainly negative (e.g. Cl − from HCl; Br− from KBr), indicating a positive
surface charge at pH=3; at pH=4, K + starts showing up, indicating the transition to neg-
ative surface charge; at pH=5, no Br − was found, indicating a negative surface charge. To
summarize, a narrow pore geometry can facilitate salt transport at very low concentrations
because ions interact with the charged surfaces, while transition to a constant salt rejection
regime occurs at a smaller than expected Debye screening length. The shift in isoelectric
point reﬂects new behavior of titratable silica surfaces in a nanoporous geometry: compared
to bulk silica, negatively charged surfaces can be neutralized with fewer protons added to
solution. These studies provide us with an understanding of pore properties that can help
us design energy-eﬃcient water channels.
Origins of the Dual Acidity Observed in Silica Mem-
branes
In a major theoretical advance, we identiﬁed the structural origins of the dual-acidity
constant behavior observed at silica-water interfaces[17]. Ref. [31] reported that 19% (81%)
of surface SiOH groups exhibit pKa=4.5 (8.5), respectively. This acid-base behavior governs
the net charge inside silica pore membranes, which in turn aﬀects desalination performance.
As silica-water interfaces tend to be amorphous and diﬃcult to image, we have applied
accurate ab initio molecular dynamics simulations to compute the free energy of silanol group
acidity in diverse chemical and hydrogen-bonding environments. We ﬁnd that most models
proposed for the two pKa’s in the literature, such as those based on chemical connectivity and
inter-silanol hydrogen bonding motifs, all yield pKa 7.9-9.5. High acidity of pKa 4.5, which
approximates that of acetic acid (vinegar), is observed only on strained/defected regions of
silica surfaces, on which we also ﬁnd evidence of water-incorporation reactions.
33

PAGE 34
We also examined the pKa of narrow silica slits to compare with the shift in pH of zero
charge (PZC) measured in experiments. 3, 4, and 6 layers of water are conﬁned between
periodically replicated β-cristobalite slabs with reconstructed (100) surfaces, yielding 4.0
surface SiOH groups per square nanometer of silica surface. AIMD simulations were applied
to calculate the deprotonation potential of mean force (Fig. 3.10) and extract the pKa.
We found that SiOH groups in very narrow water-ﬁlled silica slits, containing only 3 and
4 layers of water, yield a pKa of 6.9. With approximately 6 layers of water, pKa=8.0 is
predicted. Thus reducing the slit width actually decreases the pKa. This is contrary to
the expectation that more conﬁned water exhibits a lower dielectric constant and hence
renders the ionization involved in deprotonation less favorable. In other words, a higher
pKa is expected for more conﬁned water and our experimental measurements of refractive
index inside the silica nanopores do indicate a reduction relative to bulk water. However,
all predicted pKa exhibit a standard deviation of about 0.5 pH unit. Hence one may argue
that all the pKa in Fig. 3.10 are within statistical uncertainties of each other.
Compared to experimental results described earlier, we note that our model silica slits
exhibit conﬁnement in one dimension and do not have a cylindrical geometry. Furthermore,
the experiments measure the PZC, which is the arithmetic mean of the pKa of -SiOH and
SiOH+
2 . Therefore the simulations and experimental results are not directly comparable.
Discussion
Our theoretical and experimental platforms enable us to investigate the interplay between
water ﬂux and ion rejection in precisely-deﬁned nano-channels. Our simulation studies of
ion rejection reveal that high pressures can force salt pairs into a channel, even if the channel
is functionalized with charged groups at the entrance or interior. This highlights potential
pitfalls of molecular simulations that apply abnormally high pressure in order to observe
water transport at short simulation times and may also highlight diﬃculties with operating
desalination plants at high pressures. Theoretical studies of natural channels reveal three
sets of design rules for speciﬁc ion selection (at appropriate pressures) that could generate
more healthy drinking water as well as provide input to a variety of industry and energy
applications. Propositions for translating these ion-selective design features to inorganic
pores have been made, but not yet tested. Instead, we pursued a systematic experimental and
theoretical investigation to determine how variations in the chemistry of the nanopore walls
and their size aﬀect water ﬂux and salt rejection. Although varying levels of hydrophobicity
using TMS produced only modest ﬂux and ion rejection performance, we learned important
lessons regarding hydrophobicity and pore size: 1) Some hydrophilicity on channel walls is
required to provide stabilizing water ’binding sites;’ and 2) Small pore size enhances ion
rejection commensurate with reduction in water ﬂux.
In biological channel proteins, water-selective pores with perfect salt rejection are com-
posed of narrow (sub-nm) pores that pass water fast and in single ﬁle. These pores lack the
architectures associated with ion selectivity. Furthermore, narrow ’selectivity ﬁlters’ are also
34

PAGE 35
associated with fast (selective) ion transport. An investigation into the properties of small
pores reveals the importance of ion-surface interactions on ion transport properties. The
Debye screening length for a solution of speciﬁc salt concentration inside a 2-3 nm nanopore
is smaller than expected (relative to bulk solution). Therefore ion transport mechanisms
are dominated by interactions with charged surfaces even at low concentrations and lead to
enhanced ion transport. Further investigation into the charge of the conﬁned silica surfaces
shows that charge in relation to solution pH is not as expected. In the nanopore geome-
try, direct measurement of surface charge shows that the isoelectric point (the pH value for
zero surface charge) is shifted to higher pH values relative to a ﬂat surface. Thus, smaller
additions of protons (smaller shifts in pH) change the surface from negative, to neutral, to
positive. With theory, we investigated the structural origin of acid dissociation constants
of the hydroxylated silica surface and determined that strained regions of silica surfaces in-
corporate water and yield more reactive (more readily dissociable, more acidic, lower pK a)
surfaces. Thus, to approach the biological properties of cell membranes that we wish to
mimic initially, that is, the fast water transport and high salt rejection of the water-selective
protein channels, we conclude that we should avoid overly high pressures, avoid dipole ar-
rangements on the pore walls that produce ion binding sites, and create narrow pores that
promote interactions between surface and permeating species.
35

PAGE 36
(a) Unmodiﬁed silanol surface,
C.A.=38◦
(b) Treated at 150 ◦C to yield 1.0
TMS/nm2, C.A.=70◦
(c) Treated at 200 ◦C to yield 1.3
TMS/nm2, C.A.=82◦
(d) Treated at 250 ◦C to yield 1.6
TMS/nm2, C.A.=91◦
(e) Treated at 300 ◦C to yield 2.2
TMS/nm2, C.A.=98◦
(f) Membrane ﬂux
Figure 3.3. Variation in water contact angle (CA) and
channel ﬂux with surface hydrophobicity (obtained by treat-
ing surfaces with trimethyl silane, TMS). Water ﬂux dimin-
ishes with reductions in pore size (f) and increased hydropho-
bicity.
36

PAGE 37
Figure 3.4. Representative snapshot of a silica pore simu-
lated under periodic boundary conditions. The Si atoms are
colored orange, the O atoms of silica are colored red, the C
atoms of the methyl groups are colored green, the O atoms
of the water molecules are colored blue, and all H atoms are
colored white.
37

PAGE 38
Figure 3.5. Eﬀect of water force ﬁelds on the diﬀusion co-
eﬃcients (top) and occupancies of water molecules (bottom)
inside silica pores
38

PAGE 39
Figure 3.6. Eﬀect of the degree of methylation on the dif-
fusion coeﬃcients and occupancies of water molecules inside
silica pores
39

PAGE 40
Figure 3.7. Eﬀect of pore size on the diﬀusion coeﬃcients
and occupancies of water molecules inside silica pores
40

PAGE 41
Figure 3.8. a) Zeta potential measurement of mesoporous
silica; b) EDS data of KBr adsorption in mesoporous silica
as pH varies.
41

PAGE 42
(a) Eﬀect of salt concentration on 2.6 nm B56 pores
 (b) Eﬀect of pH on pores of varying diameter
Figure 3.9. Eﬀect of salt concentration and pH on ionic
current through silica nanopores.
42

PAGE 43
Figure 3.10. Deprotonation potential of mean force and
pKa as functions of the approximate number of water layers
conﬁned between silica slabs.
43

PAGE 44
44

PAGE 45
Chapter 4
Biomimetic High-Flux Desalination
Membrane Based On Self-Assembled
Nanopores Tuned by Atomic Layer
Deposition
At present, an important application area of RO technology is desalinating brackish water
from interior sources that are in the range of 3–16 g/L[26]. Although less pressure (and
energy) is required for these input sources, traditional diﬀusion-based membrane materials
require high ﬂux in order to maintain acceptable salt rejection. A membrane material able
to maintain high rejection at low ﬂux rates is required for a breakthrough in this application.
Toward this end, we report here our investigation of nanoporous separation membranes.
Porous aluminosilicates are well-known, roughly hexagonal structured, alternatives to
zeolite materials[13] that can be functionalized by grafting surface silicates as in standard
reversed-phased liquid chromatography column preparation. Aluminosilicate membranes
containing pores around 20 nm in diameter and occupying 25-50% of the surface area formed
the starting point for our experiments. A regular, oriented substructure composed of 2.6 nm
pores was then formed with a solution of silica and Brij-56 lipid followed by calcination to
remove the lipid. Finally, functionalization proceeded via deposition of silanes and layer-by-
layer coating growth during liquid-phase atomic layer deposition (LP-ALD) reaction cycles.
The molecular channels in the resulting peptide network have a sub-nm diameter with ex-
posed -N-H, O=C-, and hydrophobic aromatic groups, deliberately designed to mimic the
surface chemistry found in biological water-selective channel proteins.
The salt rejection and membrane ﬂux were characterized for varied surface chemistries
and pore sizes. We found that the salt rejection of porous ALD membranes increases substan-
tially after ALD modiﬁcation with alternating amine and hydrophobic chemistries. After 32
ALD cycles, these membranes show 85-95% salt rejection and more than triple the water ﬂux
of a polyamide thin ﬁlm composite (TFC) membrane designed for seawater desalination. In
addition the ALD membrane retains its high salt rejection properties at low pressure ranges
(<150psi), suggesting a novel rejection mechanism able to operate eﬃciently at low applied
pressure.
45

PAGE 46
Because of the oriented channel architecture aﬀorded by our experimental platform, it
is interesting to compare the pore structure with the naturally occurring aquaporin water
channel. Aquaporins allow water transport at rates on the order of 109 molecules per pore per
second and complete rejection of ions[6, 44]. Structurally, each aquaporin channel consists
of six transmembrane α-helices arranged in a right-handed bundle to form a narrow channel.
A series of backbone carbonyl oxygens, each providing a high dipole moment of around 3.5
Debye, line one side of the channel and accept one hydrogen bond per water to properly
orient a chain of translocating waters. The other side is composed primarily of hydrophobic,
aromatic residues (one phenylalanine, and several tryptophan side-chains). This regular
structure is interrupted in the middle by the asparagine NH 2 functional groups of two NPA
(asparagine, proline, alanine) motifs donating hydrogen bonds in order to prevent proton
conduction. The narrowest segment of the channel has a constriction between 3 and 5 ˚A in
diameter[29, 44].
Similar to aquaporins, our synthetic nanopores contain both hydrophilic amide and hy-
drophobic aromatic functionality within a similar pore radius. However, ALD is not able to
achieve the same level of structural control over the pore geometry. Thus water molecules
translocating through the synthetic channel experience pockets of aquaporin-like function-
ality, but are not as structurally constrained into a stable, ordered, single-ﬁle line.
Materials and Methods
The desalination membrane was fabricated by coating self-assembled mesoporous silica
on 13 mm diameter anodized porous alumina discs (anodiscs R⃝1) from Whatman, followed
by progressively tuning pore size and surface chemistry via atomic layer deposition.
To prepare mesoporous silica, 0.90 g of Brij 56 was dissolved in 15 mL ethanol, followed
by addition of 2.8 g of tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) and 1.25 mL of 0.07 M HCl aqueous
solution. The solution was stirred vigorously for 75 minutes then diluted with water to 65
mL. Anodiscs R⃝ were then dip-coated using this solution twice, and the dip-coated samples
were calcined at 450◦C for 3 hours.
In order to provide anchoring functionality for the ALD reactions, amine groups were
added to the silica surface by immersing samples in a toluene aminopropyl triethylsilicate
(APS) (33% w/w) and triethylamine (3% w/w) for 2 hours. The residual APS was removed
under vacuum at 100◦C, and conﬁrmed with FT-IR (Fig. 4.1).
ALD was carried out at 120 ◦C in an ˚A-dep ALD system. Terephthaloyl chloride (TC,
heated at 120◦C), triethylamine (TEA) and parabenzenediamine (PA, heated 120 ◦C) were
used as the precursors. Each ALD cycle consisted of the following four steps: 1) 20 seconds
exposure of TC and TEA; 2) Ar purge at a ﬂow rate of 10 sccm for 10 seconds; 3) 20
seconds exposure of PA and TEA. 4) Ar purge at a ﬂow rate of 10 sccm for 10 seconds.
1Anodisk is a registered trademark of Whatman Int’l Ltd., UK
46

PAGE 47
These steps were repeated to achieve surface polymer growth, progressively shrinking the
mesopore radius.
Results and Discussion
Fig. 4.1 shows the FTIR spectra for the mesoporous silica samples treated by APS with
various reaction times. We assigned the absorption at 1070 cm −1 to the Si-O stretching
vibration; the absorption at 3600 cm−1 to surface silica -OH groups; and the absorptions at
2800 cm−1 and 3300 cm−1 to C-H and N-H stretches, respectively. Because the absorptivity
of the N-H bond is low, only a small peak is visible at 3300 cm −1. The C-H signal at
2800 cm−1 can be attributed to the CH 2 group in the -CH 2-CH2NH ligand, and conﬁrms
modiﬁcation of the pore surface by APS.
Figure 4.1. FTIR-ATR Spectra for APS Pretreatment of
Anodiscs R⃝
Fig. 4.2 shows the FTIR spectra for the samples before ALD modiﬁcation (the red spec-
trum), after 8 cyles polyamide ALD (the purple spectrum) and after 32 cycle polyamide
ALD (the blue spectrum). Before ALD, there was no substantial absorption in the range of
1200-1900 cm−1. At 8 cycles of ALD, strong signals at 1680 cm−1 and 1510 cm−1 are present.
These are characteristic of amide I bond and amide II bonds, respectively. The adsorption
at 1440 cm−1 and 1285 cm−1 can be attributed to N-H deformation and C-N stretch in
amide structure. After 32 cycles of ALD the intensities of all these peaks increase, indicat-
ing continued deposition of polyamide in agreement with our observations of decreased pore
radius.
In order to probe the progressive pore size reduction by ALD modiﬁcation, the mem-
brane’s permeability to N 2 and He was studied. Fig. 4.3(a) shows the gas permeance of
47

PAGE 48
Figure 4.2. FTIR spectra of samples before and after ALD
membranes after various ALD cycles. Prior to ALD, the membrane showed good perme-
ability to both N 2 and He, and the He/N 2 selectivity was about 2.0. This is in agreement
with Knudsen diﬀusion operating at a pore size of 2.6 nm, much larger than the molecular
diameters of both N 2 (3.6˚A) and He (2.2 ˚A). When the number of ALD cycles increases,
the permeance of both N 2 and He decreases, conﬁrming the progressive pore size reduction.
In this range, the permeance is proportional to the square of pore diameter, as predicted
by Knudsen diﬀusion with a cylindrical pore model. After 8 cycles, the He/N 2 selectivity
becomes > 2.6. This suggests that the gas transport mechanism has changed from Knudsen
diﬀusion to conﬁgurational diﬀusion,where the pore size is expected to be about 3–4 times
the gas molecular diameter, or 1.0–1.4 nm. After 16 cycles, N 2 permeance tends to zero,
indicating that no pores larger than 3 .6 ˚A remain. This implies an ALD deposition rate of
about 0.08 ˚A/cycle or higher (if extra cycles were required to close unsealed defects gener-
ated during the Brij-56 templating). At this moment, the He permeance is still about 6.4
sccm/bar, suggesting that the membrane still has an atomic scale pore size of about 2.2–
3.6 ˚A, considering a He molecular diameter of 2.2 ˚A. After 32 cycles, the He/N 2 selectivity
increased to 36 and He permeance was 4.8 sccm, showing that the membrane retains some
porosity with pore diameter around 2–3 ˚A.
After LP-ALD deposition of polyamide, water permeance and salt rejection properties
were measured using an Alltech high pressure HPLC water pump, with a constant input feed
at 5 g/L NaCl solution and an imposed membrane pressure drop of 200 psi. Figure 4.3(b)
shows the water ﬂux and salt rejection of the membrane samples described above. Before
ALD modiﬁcation, the pore size was 2.6 nm and the pore surface was covered by hydroxyl
groups. The water ﬂux was 9.8 cc/hr and small salt rejection of 4.7% was observed. After
two ALD cycles, the water ﬂux was reduced slightly but the salt rejection increased from
48

PAGE 49
4.7% to 18%, suggesting that the polyamide surface chemistry has a substantial impact on
the salt rejection properties. After 4 ALD cycles, water ﬂux was reduced to 4.1cc/hr and the
salt rejection approached 40%. At this moment the estimated pore size was about 2.0 nm
according to gas permeance data. After 8 cycles, the water ﬂux further reduced to 2.8 cc/hr,
and the salt rejection increased to 53%, where the estimated pore size was about 1.2 nm.
After 16 cycles, water ﬂux was 2.2 cc/hr, and the salt rejection increased substantially to
78%, where the estimated average pore size was about 2–3 ˚A, but the relatively low He/N 2
selectivity of 16 suggests that there may be open defects in the membrane at this point. After
32 cycles, the water ﬂux slightly decreased to 2.0 cc/hr, while the salt rejection increased
to 86%. The estimated average pore size was still around 2–3 ˚A, but the higher He/N 2
selectivity indicates a lower defect level. The water ﬂux did not diminish much even though
the thickness of the ALD layer doubled. This suggests that after 32 cycles the ALD membrane
is thin enough that membrane thickness is not the limiting factor for water transport.
(a) Gas permeance and He/N 2 selectivity
 (b) Water ﬂux (blue) and salt rejection (red).
Figure 4.3. Variation of membrane characteristics with
increasing number of ALD cycles
Four more samples were prepared with 32 ALD cycles. The water ﬂux was measured
to be 2.00, 2.10, 2.00, and 2.18 cc/hr and the salt rejections were all in the range of 85%-
95%. Fig. 4.4 shows a performance comparison between this ALD membrane and a sample
FILMTECTM SW30HR membrane tested under the same conditions. Compared to the
polyamide thin ﬁlm composite (TFC) membrane, the ALD membrane has around three
times the water ﬂux at 300 psi, and the ratio increases with decreasing pressure. The salt
rejection ratio for the ALD membrane is slightly lower than the commercial DOW membrane
at the high pressure for which the SW30HR membrane was designed. At 150 psi, the ALD
membrane does well in both water ﬂux and salt rejection. In addition, the ALD membrane
still retains a linear ﬂux relationship and nearly constant salt rejection with decreasing
pressure, making it able to operate highly eﬃciently as low as 80 psi (at only 26 psi of
resistive loss), where it achieves a ﬂux of lP = 3.05 cm/h·bar and 87% salt rejection – for a
standard resistance of ϵ = 0.16 bar·h/cm!
In this work, we have demonstrated the fabrication of high ﬂux desalination membranes
49

PAGE 50
Figure 4.4. Comparison between ALD membrane and
commercial DOW membrane
with substantial salt rejection capabilities based on a hybrid inorganic/organic framework.
The combination of self-assembled mesoporous silica and subsequent ALD tuning has per-
mitted synthesis of an oriented nanoporous geometry with which it is possible to mimic
some features of natural water channels. The immediate improvement in salt rejection after
2 ALD cycles hints that the mixed amide/hydrophobic surface chemistry plays an important
role in ion exclusion. Further cycles substantially increase the salt rejection, likely through
a combination of narrowing the channel diameter and defect healing. When the average
channel size is narrowed to atomic dimensions, 2–3 ˚A in diameter, 85 95% salt rejection is
achieved.
With current processing conditions, our membrane may contain gap defects requiring
more ALD cycles to close, blocking some smaller pores in the process. Despite this shortcom-
ing, the high ﬂux rates achieved show that active pores remain very good water conductors.
Such chemically tunable membranes allow strong tests of channel structure/function rela-
tionships to lay the groundwork for future desalination technologies using nano-engineered
structures. The low-pressure desalination performance of the present membrane shows that
a breakthrough is possible in membrane energy eﬃciency using oriented porous materials.
Other important design goals for reverse osmosis membrane materials include a broader
operating pH and temperature range and reduced susceptibility to oxidation, biological at-
tack and degradation. Although there is plenty of room at the nano-scale for innovations of
the membrane support to address these these considerations, they must eventually be taken
into account before nanoporous reverse osmosis membranes can be brought to fruition.
Some of the advantages of silica-based membranes are the high thermal stability and
50

PAGE 51
material strength of silicates, the negligible observed dependence of rejection rate on feed
pressure, and the ability to control pore interior independently from surface chemistry. The
latter property could prove highly useful in further development of surface chemistries to
prevent biofouling. Indeed, bioﬁlm formation on silica surfaces has been considered before
in the biomedical literature. Silica is known to be much more tolerant to high tempera-
tures than polymer membranes, and this can be exploited for controlling microorganisms
by sterilization. Although our anodisk R⃝-based membrane has not been able to show the
high burst strength required for seawater desalination, the pore structure itself is expected
to be much less compressible than polymer membranes, resulting in higher water ﬂux during
high pressure operation. Additionally, our system does not show reduced salt rejection at
low pressure operation as in conventional polymer membranes. Finally, the large range of
potential pore modiﬁcations makes this an ideal setup for achieving ﬁne-grained control over
the solute rejection characteristics of ultra low pressure, nanoﬁltration membranes.
51

PAGE 52
52

PAGE 53
Chapter 5
Conclusions
In this project, we have completed a range of theoretical and experimental studies to un-
derstand, design, implement, and test novel nanoporous reverse osmosis membrane materials.
Investigations of ion selectivity in biological systems have helped elucidate the principles of
ionic selectivity encountered by natural water conducting and ion-selective channels and
generate possibilities for their translation into synthetic pores. Based on our achievements
in atomic layer deposition (ALD) and molecular imprinting techniques, we have constructed
structures that mimic biological pores in dimensions and exposed functionality. Their atomic-
scale was demonstrated using gas molecule size selectivity, and several have been shown to
possess improved salt rejection and water permeability.
Signiﬁcant accomplishments have been made toward developing a science-based under-
standing of the principles for optimization of water ﬂux and select salt rejection in mem-
branes. Both equilibrium and non-equilibrium desalination energy requirements were derived
in a form suitable for application to industrial processes, revealing the critical impact of the
membrane water permeability on overall process energy requirements and the potential≈25%
decrease on total energy consumption that could be made possible through future improve-
ments in membrane technology. We have completed computational studies of pressure-driven
water and salt permeation through model nanopore membranes, with both dipolar walls and
chemically decorated/undecorated mouths. We found that, in contrast to experience with
polymer membranes, for ﬁxed channel dimensions lower salt rejection is observed with very
high applied pressure, even for decorated pore mouths, which highlights the importance of
ion pairing eﬀects. Through an examination of model dipolar membranes, we found several
important electrostatic mechanisms for ion selection. Theoretical studies of cation selective
biological channels revealed that selectivity can be achieved through either ﬂexible pore bind-
ing sites that over-coordinate the permeant ion or through maintaining a speciﬁc cavity size
chemically preferred by the permeant ion. Simulations on coarse-grained membrane models
showed that the negative dipole moments of oxygens lining both silica and potassium chan-
nel pores cause cations to populate the pore interior more strongly for longer pores, with
corresponding anion exclusion. Next, water occupying regions of the pore far from the center
(where the surface dipole is changing and the electric ﬁeld is largest) are unable to provide
screening at large distances, lowering the eﬀective dielectric of the pore interior to values in
the neighborhood of 2.3 to 10 for 12 nm pores[16]. Because of the long-ranged interaction
of permeating ions with the oppositely oriented membrane surface dipoles, diﬀerent dipole
densities on the pore interior and membrane surface are required to achieve a net electro-
53

PAGE 54
static potential in macroscopic pores. Salt rejection was found to be much higher for pores
incorporating uniform dipole layers along the channel as opposed to simple functionalization
of the outer pore rim. Atomistic molecular dynamics calculations with hydrophobic pores
showed smaller diﬀusion constants, indicating lower water permeabilities, correlating with
experimentally observed lower ﬂux and higher salt rejection. Ab-initio molecular dynamics
simulations also identiﬁed the structural origins of the dual-acidity constant behavior ob-
served at silica-water interfaces. This acid-base behavior governs the net charge inside silica
pore membranes, which aﬀects desalination performance through tuning the channel’s ionic
selectivity and hydrophilicity. These theoretical works have made valuable contributions to
the design and testing of new desalination membrane materials and processes.
We have also made advancements in technical and experimental capabilities and expertise
for nanoporous membrane design, fabrication, testing and application. Using liquid-phase
atomic layer deposition, we achieved deposition of biomimetic chemical functionality on
self-assembled mesoporous silica to create 2-3 nm nanopores capable of high salt rejection
and water permeability. The best measurements on these systems yielded standardized
resistances of 0.16 bar-h/cm, two to three times lower than the lowest energy consumption
membranes currently available for brackish water desalination. This eﬃciency increase would
directly translate to a 50-66% decrease in operating energy loss at each RO membrane unit.
These membranes are capable of constant salt rejection at very low excess pressure and are in
addition relatively insensitive to input salt concentration for salinities in the useful operating
range above 0.05 mol/L (Fig. 3.9(a)). Preliminary capacitance measurements of plain 2.6
nm diameter silica pores placed the interior dielectric around 29, roughly consistent with
the theoretical estimates on narrower channels. Also in accord with theory, but contrary to
expectations of decreased friction from pore walls, increases in pore hydrophobicity decreased
water permeability. Although the increase in water contact angle and water-pore surface
tension should imply decreased pore wetting and friction, a combination of decreased pore
size by the dewetted trimethylsilyl groups and water orientational restriction have combined
to produce this result. Finally, experiments to understand the role of surface charge on ion
transport through nanopores with pore sizes smaller than the Debye screening length have
resulted in new insights into water reactions at the silica-water interface. Because of the
multiple protonation reactions of surface silanols, we measured the surface charge of silica
as a function of pH, and found that the isoelectric point of nanoporous silica is pH=3 ∼4,
0.5∼1.5 higher than a ﬂat silica surface. The combination of theory and experiment utilized
in this project has thus given both top-down and bottom-up characterizations of the utility
and chemistry of these novel nanoporous membrane materials.
The studies undertaken in this work lay the groundwork for research in several future
directions. First, preliminary work has shown that an extension of the nonequilibrium theory
of Chapter 2 to account for electrically driven transport can be developed. This will enable
determination of individual ion selectivities and water ﬂux through voltage measurements on
patches of tens of nanochannels. Studying batch to batch variations at this reduced size will
allow us to separate out irreproducible ﬂuxes arising from membrane defects as well as lead to
further information on ion transport behavior within nanopores. This approach has not yet
been pursued to completion due to possible diﬃculties in inferring the very small water ﬂux
54

PAGE 55
through these small patches from variations in current with time and concentration[30, 33],
and in addition is not suitable for scale-up.
Next, the phenomenal conductivity of aquaporins and the theoretical limiting conduc-
tivity calculated in Chapter 2 indicates that order of magnitude improvements in water
permeabilities over what has been achieved to date are still possible. Since this report has
shown improved ﬂux and salt rejection capabilities, the most pressing need is to develop a
strong, ﬂexible support containing a high density of oriented nanochannels for ALD modi-
ﬁcation. This can provide a work-around for the brittle anodized alumina supports used in
Chapter 4 – required for creating ideal porous structures matching theoretical studies used
to learn pore design rules – and possibly decrease the number of large gap defects. It would
also enable incorporation of the resulting membrane into the spiral wound elements common
to industrial operations and possibly ALD deposition in an assembly line format. Further
improvements enabling the placement of water-coordinating groups at precise intervals along
the channel axis would allow an even closer approach to the aquaporin structure, bringing
further possible improvements in performance.
Finally, the approach taken in this work for ALD functionalization of nanochannels can
be immediately applied in other important energy storage and separation applications. Car-
bon dioxide capture and removal could potentially be mediated by pores able to transport
carbonate selectively. Further incorporating a switchable gate into such a CO 2−
3 -selective
pore would provide a membrane capable of novel staged architectures for CO 2 separation.
Our biologically inspired approach also holds potential promise for the study and design of
novel Li+-selection mechanisms for translation into synthetic membranes. Ion selective mem-
branes in general can be used to convert energy stored in concentration gradients directly
into electrical energy.
Our experiments show that the behavior of ions conﬁned within nanopores diﬀer signiﬁ-
cantly from that in free bulk solutions. Our theoretical studies show novel structural designs
that control ion passage through membranes. Based on these observations, new ideas have
been developed to help design nanopores that permit fast transport of water and select ions,
thus providing novel solutions for energy-eﬃcient, highly selective membrane-based separa-
tion technology critical not only to water puriﬁcation, but also pertinent to electrical energy
storage applications in supercapacitors and lithium-ion batteries. Our work thus strongly
impacts Sandia’s missions in national energy security (eﬃcient separations) and public health
(clean, cheap water).
55

PAGE 56
56

PAGE 57
References
[1] W. T. Andrews, W. F. Pergande, and G. S. McTaggart. Energy performance enhance-
ments of a 950 m 3/d seawater reverse osmosis unit in Grand Cayman. Desalination,
135(1–3):195–204, 2001.
[2] D. Asthagiri, P. D. Dixit, S. Merchant, M. E. Paulaitis, L. R. Pratt, S. B. Rempe,
and S. Varma. Ion selectivity from local conﬁgurations of ligands in solutions and ion
channels. Chem. Phys. Lett. (Frontiers Article) , 485(1–3):1–7, 2010. (invited, cover
page).
[3] Z. Chen and Y. B. et al. Jiang. Dna translocation through an array of kinked nanopores.
Nature Materials, 9:667–675, 2010.
[4] R. T. Cygan, C. J. Brinker, M. Nyman, K. Leung, and S. B. Rempe. A molecular basis
for advanced materials in water treatment. MRS Bull. , 33:42–47, 2008.
[5] F. Fornasiero, H. G. Park, J. K. Holt, M. Stadermann, C. P. Grigoropoulos, A. Noy,
and O. Bakajin. Ion exclusion by sub-2-nm carbin nanotube pores. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci., 105(45):17250–17255, 2008.
[6] J. Bernard Heymann and Andreas Engel. Aquaporins: Phylogeny, structure, and phys-
iology of water channels. News Physiol. Sci. , 14(5):187–193, 1999.
[7] C. Jarzynski and O. Mazonka. Feynman’s ratchet and pawl: An exactly solvable model.
Phys. Rev. E , 59(6):6448–6459, Jun 1999.
[8] E. T. Jaynes. The minimum entropy production principle. Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. ,
31:579–601, 1980.
[9] Y.-B. Jiang, G. Xomeritakis, Z. Chen, D. Dunphy, D. Kissel, J. L. Cecchi, and C. Jeﬀrey
Brinker. Sub-10 nm thick microporous membranes made by plasma-deﬁned atomic layer
deposition of a bridged silsesquioxane precursor.J. Amer. Chem. Soc., 129:15446–15447,
November 2007.
[10] Ying-Bing Jiang, Nanguo Liu, Henry Gerung, Joseph L. Cecchi, and C. Jeﬀrey Brinker.
Nanometer-thick conformal pore sealing of self-assembled mesoporous silica by plasma-
assisted atomic layer deposition. J. Amer. Chem. Soc. , 128(34):11018–11019, 2006.
[11] Peter C. Jordan. Tuning a potassium channel–the caress of the surroundings. Biophys.
J., 93(4):1091–1092, 2007.
[12] L. Kastelan-Kunst, V. Dananic, B. Kunst, and K. Kosutic. Preparation and porosity
of cellulose triacetate reverse osmosis membranes. J. Membrane Sci. , 109(2):223–230,
1996.
57

PAGE 58
[13] C. T. Kresge, M. E. Leonowicz, W. J. Roth, J. C. Vartuli, and J. S. Beck. Ordered meso-
porous molecular sieves synthesized by a liquid-crystal template mechanism. Nature,
359:710–712, 1992.
[14] R Kubo. The ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem. Rep. Prog. Phys., 29:255, 1966.
[15] Uri Lachish. Osmosis and thermodynamics. Am. J. Phys. , 75(11):997–998, 2007.
[16] K. Leung. Ion-dipole interactions are asymptotically unscreened by water in dipolar
nanopores, yielding patterned ion distributions. JACS, 130:1808, 2008.
[17] K Leung, I. M. B. Nielsen, and L. J. Criscenti. Elucidating the bimodal acid-base
behavior of the water-silica interface from ﬁrst principles. J. Amer. Chem. Soc. ,
131(51):18358–18365, 2009.
[18] K. Leung and S. B. Rempe. Ion rejection by nanoporous membranes in pressure-driven
molecular dynamics simulations. J. Comput. and Theor. Nanosci. , 6:1–8, 2009. (in-
vited).
[19] K. Leung, S. B. Rempe, and A. von Lilienfeld. Ab initio molecular dynamics calculation
of ion hydration free energies. J. Chem. Phys. , 130(20):204507–204518, 2009.
[20] Kevin Leung, Susan B. Rempe, and Christian D. Lorenz. Salt permeation and exclusion
in hydroxylated and functionalized silica pores. Phys. Rev. Lett. , 96(9):095504, Mar
2006.
[21] Ira N. Levine. Physical Chemistry. McGraw-Hill, 5 th ed. edition, 2001.
[22] Liangxiong Li, Junhang Dong, and Tina M. Nenoﬀ. Transport of water and alkali
metal ions through mﬁ zeolite membranes during reverse osmosis. Sep. Purif. Tech. ,
53(1):42–48, 2007.
[23] Liangxiong Li, Junhang Dong, Tina M. Nenoﬀ, and Robert Lee. Desalination by reverse
osmosis using MFI zeolite membranes. J. Membr. Sci. , 243(1-2):401–404, 2004.
[24] David R. Lide. CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics . CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,
2004.
[25] C. D. Lorenz, M. Tsige, S. B. Rempe, M. Chandross, M. J. Stevens, and G. S. Grest.
Simulation study of the silicon oxide and water interface. J. Comput. and Theor.
Nanosci., 2010. (invited, in print).
[26] Yan-Yue Lu, Yang-Dong Hu, Xiu-Liung Zhang, Lian-Ying Wu, and Qing-Zhi Liu. Op-
timum design of reverse osmosis system under diﬀerent feed concentration and product
speciﬁcation. J. Membr. Sci. , 287(2):219–229, 2007.
[27] S. Moghaddam, E. Pengwang, and Y. B. et al. Jiang. An inorganic-organic proton
exchange membrane for fuel cells with a controlled nanoscale pore structure. Nature
Nanotech, 5:230–236, 2010.
58

PAGE 59
[28] A. W. Mohammad, N. Hilal, H. Al-Zoubi, and N. A. Darwish. Prediction of perme-
ate ﬂuxes and rejections of highly concentrated salts in nanoﬁltration membranes. J.
Membr. Sci., 289(1-2):40–50, 2007.
[29] Kazuyoshi Murata, Kaoru Mitsuoka, Teruhisa Hirai, Thomas Walz, Peter Agre,
J. Bernard Heymann, Andreas Engel, and Yoshinori Fujiyoshi. Structural determinants
of water permeation through aquaporin-1. Nature, 407:599–605, October 2000.
[30] Tatsuhiro Okada, Signe Kjelstrup Ratkje, and Harald Hanche-Olsen. Water transport
in cation exchange membranes. J. Membrane Sci. , 66(2-3):179–192, 1992.
[31] Shaowei Ong, Xiaolin Zhao, and Kenneth B. Eisenthal. Polarization of water molecules
at a charged interface: second harmonic studies of the silica/water interface. Chemical
Physics Letters, 191(3-4):327 – 335, 1992.
[32] Lars Onsager. Reciprocal relations in irreversible processes. I. Phys. Rev., 37(4):405–
426, Feb 1931.
[33] Magnar Ottøy, Tormod Førland, Signe Kjelstrup Ratkje, and Steﬀen Møller-Holst.
Membrane transference numbers from a new emf method. J. Membrane Sci. , 74(1-
2):1–8, 1992.
[34] G. Owen, M. Bandi, J. A. Howell, and S. J. Churchouse. Economic assessment of
membrane processes for water and waste water treatment. J. Membrane Sci. , 102:77–
91, 1995.
[35] J. Pang, J. N. Stuecker, Y.-B. Jiang, A. J. Bhakta, E. D. Branson, P. Li, J. Cesarano,
D. Sutton, P. Calvert, and C. J. Brinker. Directed aerosol writing of ordered silica
nanostructures on arbitrary surfaces with self-assembling inks. SMALL, 4(7):982–989,
2008.
[36] G. Pique. Low power bill makes desalination aﬀordable. Int’t Desal. And Water Reuse
Quarterly, November 2005.
[37] S. B. Rempe and K. Leung. Response to “comment on ‘ab initio molecular dynamics
calculation of ion hydration free energies’ [jcp 133, xx71xx (2010).”. J. Chem. Phys. ,
133(1), 2010. (in print).
[38] S. B. Rempe, T. R. Mattsson, and K. Leung. On the complete basis set limit and
plane-wave methods in ﬁrst-principles simulations of water. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.
(Communication), 10:4685–4687, 2008.
[39] R. Riley. Reverse Osmosis. 1990. vol. 2, US DOE Report DOE/ER/30133-H1.
[40] Dow Water & Process Solutions. FILMTECTM Reverse Osmosis Membranes Technical
Manual. Dow Chemical Company, Midland MI. electronic resource, downloaded Sept.
2010.
59

PAGE 60
[41] A. J. Staverman. Non-equilibrium thermodynamics of membrane processes. Trans.
Faraday Soc., 48:176–185, 1952.
[42] R. L. Stover. Energy recovery device performance analysis. ERI Technical Report, 2005.
[43] R. L. Stover. Low energy consumption SWRO. ERI Technical Report, 2008.
[44] Emad Tajkhorshid, Peter Nollert, Morten ø Jensen, Larry J. W. Miercke, Joseph
O’Connell, Robert M. Stroud, and Klaus Schulten. Control of the selectivity of the
aquaporin water channel family by global orientational tuning. Science, 296(5567):525–
530, April 2002.
[45] S. Varma and S. B. Rempe. Tuning ion coordination architectures to enable selective
partitioning. Biophys. J., 93:1093–1099, 2007.
[46] Sameer Varma and Susan B. Rempe. Structural transitions in ion coordination driven
by changes in competition for ligand binding. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 130(46):15405–15419,
2008.
[47] Sameer Varma and Susan B. Rempe. Multi-body eﬀects in ion binding and selectivity.
Biophys. J., 2010. in press.
[48] Sameer Varma, Dubravko Sabo, and Susan B. Rempe. K +/Na+ selectivity in K chan-
nels and valinomycin: Over-coordination versus cavity-size constraints. J. Mol. Biol. ,
376:13–22, 2008.
[49] Troy W. Whitﬁeld, Sameer Varma, Edward Harder, Guillaume Lamoureux, Susan B.
Rempe, and Benoˆ ıt Roux. Theoretical study of aqueous solvation of K+ comparing ab
initio, polarizable, and ﬁxed-charge models. J. Chem. Theory Comput., 3(6):2068–2082,
2007.
[50] G. Xomeritakis, N.G. Liu, Z. Chen, Y.-B. Jiang, R. Khn, P.E. Johnson, C.-Y. Tsai,
P.B. Shah, S. Khalil, S. Singh, and C.J. Brinker. Anodic alumina supported dual-layer
microporous silica membranes. J. Membrane Sci. , 287(2):157–161, 2007.
[51] Luning Zhang, Seema Singh, Chuanshan Tian, Y. Ron Shen, Yan Wu, Mark A. Shannon,
and C. Jeﬀery Brinker. Nanoporous silica-water interfaces studied by sum-frequency
vibrational spectroscopy. J. Chem. Phys. , 130(15):154702, 2009.
60

PAGE 61
DISTRIBUTION:
1 Ying-Bing Jiang
E PS, MSC03 2040
1 University of New Mexico
Albuquerque NM 87131-0001
2 MS 0895 S. Rempe, 08635
2 MS 1315 D. M. Rogers, 08635
1 MS 1413 E. Ackerman, 08635
1 MS 9291 B. Simmons, 08630
1 MS 9161 B. Even, 08650
1 MS 9161 S. Allendorf, 08656
1 MS 9405 G. Kubiak, 08600
1 MS 0754 M. Rigali, 06736
1 MS 1415 P. J. Feibelman, 01130
1 MS 0886 T. M. Alam, 01816
1 MS 0735 J. Merson, 06730
1 MS 0754 P. Brady, 06730
1 MS 0484 R. Hwang, 08004
1 MS 1427 C. Barbour, 01100
1 MS 1315 J. Nelson, 01130
1 MS 0724 J. Hruby, 06000
1 MS 0899 Technical Library, 9536 (electronic copy)
1 MS 0161 Legal Intellectual Property, 11500
1 MS 0359 D. Chavez, LDRD Oﬃce, 1911
61

PAGE 62
62

PAGE 63
v1.35

PAGE 64
